--- PDF PAGE 1 ---
arXiv:2205.02987v1  [cs.HC]  6 May 2022
Tell Me Something That Will Help Me Trust Y ou:
A Survey of Trust Calibration in Human-Agent Interaction
George J. Cancro1,2 , Shimei Pan1 and James Foulds1
1University of Maryland, Baltimore County, Information Sys tems Department
2Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, Laur el, MD
{gcancro1, shimei, jfoulds }@umbc.edu
Abstract
When a human receives a prediction or recom-
mended course of action from an intelligent agent,
what additional information, beyond the prediction
or recommendation itself, does the human require
from the agent to decide whether to trust or reject
the prediction or recommendation? In this paper we
survey literature in the area of trust between a sin-
gle human supervisor and a single agent subordi-
nate to determine the nature and extent of this addi-
tional information and to characterize it into a tax-
onomy that can be leveraged by future researchers
and intelligent agent practitioners. By examining
this question from a human-centered, information-
focused point of view, we can begin to compare and
contrast different implementations and also provide
insight and directions for future work.
1 Introduction
Imagine you are a Hearing Examiner conducting a parole
hearing and it is your job to decide whether an inmate should
be released from prison. To increase consistency and improve
decision-making, you have been provided a partner; an in-
telligent agent who, upon reviewing the inmate’s record and
other attributes, provides a recommendation to either appr ove
or refuse parole. In one speciﬁc case, you recommend parole,
but the intelligent agent recommends parole be refused. Now
what do you do?
The situation you are in is difﬁcult because even though
the intelligent agent was presented as your partner, you hav e
a legal and ethical responsibility to get this decision righ t.
Therefore, you are acting as the agent’s supervisor; faced w ith
a decision to either override or accept your subordinate’s ( the
agent’s) recommendation.
This decision is called a “ trust calibration ” decision. We
deﬁne trust calibration as a process by which a human super-
visor determines whether an individual agent’s prediction or
recommended course of action should be trusted on a case-
by-case basis. The original work on trust calibration was pe r-
formed by Muir [1987] who stated: the human supervisor
“must learn to calibrate his trust, that is to set his trust to a
level corresponding to [an agent’s] trustworthiness, and t hen
use the [agent] accordingly.”
Unfortunately, not all human supervisors ‘use the agent
accordingly’. Some humans just side with the intelli-
gent agent (i.e., “automation bias” or “missed interven-
tion”) [Lyell and Coiera, 2017; Lee, 2018]. Others imme-
diately override the recommendation and go with their own
decision (i.e., “algorithm aversion” or “bad intervention ”)
[Dietvorst et al., 2015; A wadet al., 2018]. In a benign situa-
tion (e.g., movie recommendation), being automation biase d
or algorithm adverse may have little consequence. This is
not the case in high-stakes situations (e.g., military, sec urity,
health-care, criminal justice), where inability to calibrate trust
correctly can result in severe effects to human life. For exa m-
ple, for algorithm aversion, if judges had agreed with an intel-
ligent agent in ’failure to appear’ decisions, pre-trial de tention
rates would have been reduced by 41.9% with no increase in
crime rate [Lowens, 2020]. In another example, for algorith m
bias, if operators had not trusted the Patriot missile targe ting
system course of action, a Royal Air Force jet would not have
been shot down by friendly ﬁre [Bode and Watts, 2021].
The ideal partnership lies between these two extremes by
achieving the goal of complementary performance; where the
human supervisor agrees with the agent when the agent’s
performance is likely to exceed the supervisor, and the su-
pervisor rejects the agent when the agent is likely to under-
perform.
To determine when the agent is likely to exceed or under-
perform the human supervisor, you will need more informa-
tion than simply the main output of the agent. We call this
additional information “ trust calibration meta-information .”
We deﬁne trust calibration meta-information as informatio n
ﬂowing from the agent subordinate to the human supervisor
that provides context to the main output of the agent; thereb y
facilitating a better understanding of whether the main out put
should be accepted.
The concept of trust calibration appears in many differ-
ent research ﬁelds: automation, decision-making, recom-
mender systems, human-robot interaction, and explainable
AI (XAI). In some ﬁelds, such as automation [Lee and See,
2004], decision-making [Wang and Yin, 2021] and recom-
mender systems [Kunkel et al., 2019], trust calibration has
been apart of the literature for some time. In human-robot
interaction, trust includes multiple factors related to pe rfor-
mance, appearance, and interaction behavior [Khavas, 2021 ],
but trust calibration decisions still exist to determine wh ether

--- PDF PAGE 2 ---
the human supervisor should intervene in a robot’s course of
action [Wang et al., 2016]. In XAI, much focus is given to un-
derstandability, comprehensibility, interpretability, and trans-
parency [Arrieta et al., 2020] but a “central task for XAI is
calibrating trust” [Sperrle et al., 2020]. To ensure coverage
across this wide set of research, we structured our survey as a
trace through these various ﬁelds.
1.1 Test Set Accuracy vs. Meta-Information
When confronted with the decision to accept or intervene in
an agent main output, one might consider the test set accu-
racy of the intelligent agent as a useful guide. Test set ac-
curacy (i.e., the performance of the agent on a set of data not
used during agent training) can be considered trust calibration
meta-information, but in most cases is not sufﬁcient for thi s
decision. For example, knowing an agent achieved 99% ac-
curacy during testing, does not help determine if the curren t
case is the statistical 1 out of 100 where the agent is incorre ct.
And moreover, test set accuracy does not inform the user if
the current case is even in the same distribution as the cases
used during the agent’s training or testing. Therefore, we
need to consider what additional types of meta-information
can be leveraged.
1.2 Why is a Taxonomy Needed?
As this survey will show, multiple works have considered
trust calibration and have identiﬁed, indirectly, the meta -
information associated with their proposed methods. Unfor -
tunately, it is difﬁcult to cross-compare these papers sinc e
terminology used is overlapping in some senses and conﬂict-
ing in others. For example, Zhang et al. [2020] states “un-
like conﬁdence, explanation did not seem to affect partic-
ipants’ trust.” In another paper, McGuirl and Sarter [2006]
state “conﬁdence information can improve trust calibratio n.”
Upon closer examination, even though these authors appear
to agree, these authors have used the same term, “conﬁdence”
with slightly different meanings. Zhang uses “conﬁdence” t o
refer to historical performance values, while McGuirl uses
“conﬁdence” to refer to an uncertainty of how close the cur-
rent case matches the training data set.
Before making judgements on what types or modalities of
trust calibration meta-information best drives human-age nt
partnerships toward the goal of complementary performance ,
we believe the community needs a taxonomy to speciﬁcally
characterize the meta-information leveraged in the differ ent
literature on trust calibration.
Therefore, the goal of this paper is to survey trust calibra-
tion from a meta-information point of view and create a tax-
onomy of trust calibration meta-information; thereby prov id-
ing a more rigorous basis for describing and contrasting dif -
ferent approaches to trust calibration. This taxonomy shou ld
improve the discussion in the ﬁeld of trust calibration, lea d
to more nuanced and effective comparison studies across dif -
ferent trust calibration approaches, and potentially open new
areas of trust calibration research.
In summary, the novel contributions of our work include:
• A taxonomy for describing trust calibration meta-
information, in terms of content, modality, interactivity ,
and timing.
• An overview of trust calibration literature from a human-
computer interaction point of view
• Identiﬁcation of future research opportunities in the are a
of trust calibration meta-information.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: Sec-
tion 2 reviews the work done in performing the survey. Sec-
tion 3 details the taxonomy and demonstrates how surveyed
literature is characterized within the taxonomy. In Sectio n 4
we provide a discussion of initial ﬁndings generated by leve r-
aging our taxonomy. Finally, we present limitations and con -
clusions in Sections 5 and 6 respectively.
2 Survey Methodology
Our survey on trust calibration leveraged a bootstrapping
method. Starting with a set of initial seed papers retrieved
using keywords ’trust,’ ’trust calibration,’ and ’calibra te trust’
on Google Scholar, we surveyed papers across the automa-
tion, XAI, decision-aids, and robotics ﬁelds and then ex-
panded our survey by adding relevant papers through paper
references. To maintain scope within our survey, we focused
on literature that examined trust on an agent’s instance-le vel
decisions. We also limited our survey to papers where trust
calibration is performed within an asymmetric partnership be-
tween a single human and a single agent where the human
is the supervisor, and the intelligent agent is the subordin ate
(or assistant). Finally, instead of focusing on methods of t rust
calibration, we focused on literature that directly or indi rectly
discussed the meta-information supporting the trust calib ra-
tion. This resulted in a more human-computer interaction
(HCI) focused perspective that we believe will facilitate o ur
ability to group research similarities across diverse ﬁeld s and
diverse agent implementations.
3 Meta-Information Taxonomy
After performing the survey, we attempted to classify the
meta-information into major categories. In this paper, we
characterize trust calibration meta-information along fo ur di-
mensions: content, modality, interactivity, and timing. Con-
tent refers to the different types of information content th at
can be present in the meta-information. Modality refers to
the different ways in which the meta-information content ca n
be presented. Interactivity refers to whether the human sup er-
visor can interact with the meta-information. Timing refer s to
the different times in which the ﬂow of meta-information can
be initiated.
Within each major category, we used results from the
survey to build up sub-categories. The names of the sub-
categories were generated by selecting terms that were com-
mon in multiple papers or that we felt best represented the
entire type.
The combination of the major categories (content, modal-
ity, interactivity, timing) with the various sub-categori es
forms our proposed taxonomy for trust calibration meta-
information (Table 1).
Using this taxonomy, any trust calibration approach can
be characterized by selecting a sub-category from each of th e
four major categories. For example, if an agent provides a nu -
meric conﬁdence as trust calibration meta-information wit h

--- PDF PAGE 3 ---
Major Category Sub-Category
Content Case-Based
Sensitivity
Inﬂuence
Conﬁdence/Risk
Historic Performance
Uncertainty
Logic Rationale
Modality Narriative
V alues
Graphical
Interactivity Y es/No
Timing Pro-active
Concurrent
Post-hoc
Table 1: Trust calibration meta-information taxonomy stru cture of
major categories and sub-categories
its main output, the associated meta-information would be
classiﬁed in the above taxonomy as: Conﬁdence/Risk Con-
tent, V alues Modality, No Interactivity, and Concurrent Tim-
ing.
The following four subsections describe each of the major
categories: content, modality, interactivity, and timing.
3.1 Meta-Information Content
Although there is a huge diversity of papers in trust cali-
bration, when we examine the content of meta-information,
we observed 7 meta-information content sub-categories,
as shown in Table 2, that are common across previous
works. We summarize the multiple sub-categories of meta-
information content below.
Case-based Content
Case-based content uses examples (positive or negative) from
the agent training, validation, or operations that is pertinent to
the current decision or situation in order to provide the human
supervisor with context of how previous decisions were made
or situations were handled. By understanding the relations hip
between the current situation and the past examples, the hu-
man supervisor has more information by which to judge the
agent’s ability.
Case-based content typically is presented by showing
the prior case that is most similar to the current situation
[Lai and Tan, 2019]. If more than one case contains the
same input as the current situation, the percentage of exact
matches for each output class can be shown [Dodge et al.,
2019]. If no exact matches are found, a nearest neighbor
process (e.g., a KNN approach) can be run to determine the
closest match. More than one closest match can also be pro-
vided. For example, Lai and Tan [2019]; Cai et al. [2019];
Wang and Yin [2021] provide multiple cases: the closest
match from the training data that has the same output as the
current situation and the closest match that has the outputs
that differ from the current situation. Case-based content
can also take the form of a comparison between the current
situation and a more accepted case [Gregor and Benbasat,
1999; Bussone et al., 2015; Ehrlich et al., 2011]. For exam-
ple, Bussone et al. [2015] suggested that comparison of cur-
rent symptoms to accepted symptoms from a standard med-
ical diagnosis can provide the context for agent’s diagnosi s.
The comparison to the accepted case can be side-by-side or
through the calculation of a similarity metric [Ehrlich et al.,
2011].
Sensitivity Content
Sensitivity content presents the human supervisor with how
much one or more inputs of the task would have to differ to
change the output. Sensitivity content attempts to reﬁne th e
human supervisor’s mental model of the agent by providing
insight into the agent’s decision boundaries. Decision bou nd-
aries represent a more compact representation of the detail s
of the agent’s decision-making process and enables the hu-
man to compare the agent’s decision boundaries to their own.
Sensitivity content is typically presented as what is the
input change necessary to change the output [Dodge et al.,
2019; Wang and Yin, 2021] (e.g., “If the defendant’s age had
been 29 instead of 26, she would have predicted as NOT
likely to re-offend”) [Wang and Yin, 2021].
Inﬂuence Content
Inﬂuence content presents the human supervisor with how
much inputs of the task inﬂuence the output. Inﬂuence
content attempts to assist the human supervisor by pro-
vide insight into the agent’s decision-making process. The
weights each input/feature are a pseudo-representation of the
decision-making process that enable the human supervisor t o
make contrasting examinations of the weights by comparing
them to the supervisor’s own mental model of what is most
important about the task.
Inﬂuence content can be presented as: the contribu-
tion or importance of an attribute in determining the out-
come [Lai and Tan, 2019; Dodge et al., 2019; Cheng et al.,
2019; Gregor and Benbasat, 1999; Wang and Yin, 2021]
(e.g., showing the level of importance of each word in a prod-
uct review to determine if review is genuine [Lai and Tan,
2019]), or as an indication of which inputs are impacting
the outcome or course of action [Wintersberger et al., 2021;
Ehsan et al., 2021a; Wang et al., 2016; Bussone et al., 2015;
Svrcek et al., 2019] (e.g., “these objects in the environment
are being considered in an automated vehicles driving deci-
sions” [Wintersberger et al., 2021].)
Conﬁdence/Risk Content
Conﬁdence/Risk content is the estimate, by the agent, of the
likelihood of an event occurring (task success, correct answer,
loss of life, etc). Conﬁdence/Risk content is a higher-leve l
content than others since this content offers a summarizati on
of the outcome of the task. While the easiest for human super-
visors to relate to and make decisions based upon, it may not
be the easiest to understand unless the meaning of the conﬁ-
dence number and/or how it was derived are clearly commu-
nicated [Bussone et al., 2015].
Conﬁdence is presented typically as a risk or conﬁdence
about a speciﬁc instance of an output [Ashoori and Weisz,
2019; Wang et al., 2016; Bussone et al., 2015](e.g., ”I am
67% conﬁdent about this assessment” [Wang et al., 2016]).

--- PDF PAGE 4 ---
Historic Performance Content
Historic Performance content is success statistics on prior
training, validation or operations that is pertinent to the cur-
rent situation. Similar to Case-based content in terms of us -
ing prior examples, Historic Performance differs from Case -
based in that Historic Performance is an aggregate measure
of the past rather than providing key cases. In addition, His -
toric Performance content differs from Case-based in terms of
purpose. Where the purpose of Case-based is to provide de-
tails on agent decision making under similar circumstances ,
Historic Performance focuses on whether the agent should be
used in this situation or not based on aggregated statistics .
Historic Performance is typically presented as performance
during validation or past operational experience (e.g., “A gent
has an accuracy of approximately 87%”) [Lai and Tan, 2019;
Wang et al., 2016], but also can be presented as performance
against similar inputs in the past (e.g., “The agent is corre ct
N times out of 10 in cases similar to this one”) [Zhang et al.,
2020; Dodge et al., 2019], performance against other peers
in operation (e.g., 1 out of 3 peers sold at the recommended
price) [Ehsan et al., 2021a], or performance for attribute-
based groups (e.g., “58% of people in 18-29 age group re-
offended”) [Dodge et al., 2019].
Uncertainty Content
Uncertainty content is an estimate, by the agent, of the lack of
knowledge about the outcome. Uncertainty attempts to assis t
the human supervisor by providing insight how well the agent
understands the problems represented by the task. For exam-
ple, if an agent’s uncertainty is perceived by the human supe r-
visor as too large, the supervisor may be less likely to trust
the outcome of the agent [Bhatt et al., 2021]. Uncertainty
can be broken down into aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty .
Aleatoric uncertainty (doubt) represents uncertainty inh erent
in the system being modeled because of stochastic behavior.
Epistemic uncertainty (ambiguity) is the uncertainty due t o
limited data or knowledge [Tomsett et al., 2020]. Uncertainty
can be presented as the error bars on an outcome, probability
distribution summary, or spaghetti plots [Bhatt et al., 2021].
Another important area of uncertainty is the concept of out-
of-distribution. Out-of-distribution refers to differen ce in in-
puts that occur when an agent is trained and validated with
a closed-world assumption (all data from the same distri-
bution) and when the agent is deployed into an open-world
scenario where inputs can now be out-of-distribution from
the training and validation data sets [Y ang et al., 2021]. A
form of epistemic uncertainty, out-of-distribution detec tion
attempts to determine how far new inputs are from the inputs
that the agent was trained on [Tomsett et al., 2020]. By pro-
viding an estimate if the current data is out-of-distributi on,
an agent provides a powerful estimate of uncertainty. This
type of uncertainty content can be presented as a percent-
age of how close the current input matched the training set
[McGuirl and Sarter, 2006] and is a great counterbalance to
Conﬁdence/Risk content as it provides a better understandi ng
of how much weight to put on agent-generated conﬁdence
(e.g., a high conﬁdence should be viewed as useless if the
agent also provides high probability that the assessment wa s
performed on inputs out-of-distribution with training inp uts).
Logic Rationale Content
Logic Rationale content provides insight into the inner work-
ings of agent logic that led to the outcome. The beneﬁt of
Logic Rationale content is that it assists the human supervi -
sor to understand the “why” behind agent actions.
Logic Rationale is typically presented in the form of lim-
ited logic statements [Ehsan et al., 2021b; Zhu and Williams,
2020; Svrcek et al., 2019] (e.g., “I am going to collect
red resources because you are low on red resources”
[Zhu and Williams, 2020], or “This was recommended be-
cause it contains features of movies you positively rated in
the past” [Svrcek et al., 2019]). Logic Rationale can also be
presented in the form of actual internal logic, if the agents
method allows (e.g., decision tree, rules) [Huysmans et al.,
2011] or if the understandable logic can be extracted from a
black box agent [Guidotti et al., 2019].
3.2 Meta-Information Modality
Previous work in trust calibration combined aspects of meta -
information ﬂow content and modality. We offer a different
analysis where we separate content and modality. The sec-
tions below summarize the multiple sub-categories of meta-
information modalities.
Narrative Modality
The Narrative modality is a text-based presentation of meta-
information ﬂow content. This modality is typically repre-
sented as one or more sentences of text [Dodge et al., 2019;
Lai and Tan, 2019; Zhang et al., 2020; Svrcek et al., 2019].
The narrative modality allows the human supervisor to read
about behavior or outcomes in a manner similar to how a hu-
man supervisor would interact a human subordinate.
V alues Modality
The V alues modality is a numeric presentation of meta-
information ﬂow content. This modality can be presented as
a percentage (e.g., “70%”) [Lai and Tan, 2019; Wang et al.,
2016], or as a frequency (e.g., “2 out of 3”) [Zhang et al.,
2020]. The values modality provides a straightforward mech -
anism to communicate meta-information amounts. As Miller
[2019] states, however, solely using values may be “unsatis -
fying unless accompanied by an underlying causal explana-
tion.”
Graphical Modality
The Graphical modality is a visual presentation of
meta-information ﬂow content. This modality is typ-
ically presented as highlights on top of existing con-
tent (e.g., highlights of important objects in the ﬁeld of
view), [Wintersberger et al., 2021], plots [Bhatt et al., 2021;
McGuirl and Sarter, 2006] (e.g., cone-of-uncertainty of a p re-
dicted path) [Bhatt et al., 2021], or charts [Schaffer et al.,
2019; Wang and Yin, 2021] (e.g., bar chart of long-term re-
ward of various outcomes [Schaffer et al., 2019]). The graph-
ical modality provides a quickly digestible form of meta-
information.
3.3 Meta-Information Interactivity
When describing meta-information ﬂows, we need to con-
sider whether interactivity exists or not within the meta-
information ﬂow.

--- PDF PAGE 5 ---
Sub-Category Description Explanation Examples Relevant P apers
Case-Based Examples (positive or negative)
from the agent training, testing
or operations that is pertinent to
the current situation
“The closest match to this situation
in my training set is **this** and the
outcome of that training example was
a success. ”
[Wang and Yin, 2021; Dodge et al.,
2019; Cai et al., 2019;
Lai and Tan, 2019; Bussone et al.,
2015; Ehrlich et al., 2011;
Gregor and Benbasat, 1999]
Sensitivity Show how much one or more
inputs of the task would have to
differ to change the outcome
“The weight of the object would have
to grow by 250 lbs. before I would not
be able to carry it. ”
[Wang and Yin, 2021; Dodge et al.,
2019]
Inﬂuence Show how much inputs of the
task inﬂuence the outcome
“The inputs most driving this decision
was prior convictions and age. ”
[Wintersberger et al., 2021;
Zhang et al., 2020; Wang and Yin,
2021; Dodge et al., 2019;
Lai and Tan, 2019; Cheng et al.,
2019; Svrcek et al., 2019;
Wang et al., 2016; Bussone et al.,
2015; Gregor and Benbasat, 1999]
Conﬁdence/
Risk
Estimate by the agent of the
likelihood of a correct output or
an event occurring
“I estimate a 57% risk of damage to
my equipment in the process of per-
forming this task. ”
[Zhu and Williams, 2020;
Ashoori and Weisz, 2019;
Wang et al., 2016; Bussone et al.,
2015]
Historic
Performance
Success statistics on prior situa-
tions that is pertinent to the cur-
rent situation
“I have performed this mission in sim-
ilar conditions before, and did so suc-
cessfully 80% of the time. ”
[Zhang et al., 2020; Dodge et al.,
2019; Ehsan et al., 2021a;
Lai and Tan, 2019; Wang et al.,
2016]
Uncertainty Estimate by the agent of the
lack of knowledge about the
outcome
“The object in this image has a 20%
chance of representing an object I
have not been trained on. ”
[Tomsett et al., 2020; Bhatt et al.,
2021; McGuirl and Sarter, 2006]
Logic
Rationale
Provide insights into the inner
workings of agent logic that led
to the outcome
“I am going to collect red resources
because you are low on red re-
sources. ”
[Ehsan et al., 2021b;
Zhu and Williams, 2020;
Svrcek et al., 2019]
Table 2: Summary of meta-information content sub-categori es with description and explanation examples
Interactivity enables a back-and-forth interaction with t he
human supervisor to reveal aspects and trends in meta-
information ﬂow content. The interactive modality allows t he
human supervisor to explore the agent’s behavior through ad -
justing inputs or various internal parameters of the agent. For
example, Cheng et al. [2019] proposed an interactive inter-
face where the human can modify inputs to determine which
inputs are driving the agent’s decision making. In another e x-
ample, Schaffer et al. [2019] enabled users to alter estimates
of the external environment (i.e., other player tendencies ), to
understand the relationship between outcome and input.
3.4 Meta-Information Timing
In order to completely describe meta-information ﬂows, we
need to also consider the timing of the ﬂow (i.e. when is the
ﬂow initiated). The sections below summarize the multiple
sub-categories of meta-information ﬂow timings.
Proactive Timing
In Proactive timing , the meta-information ﬂow is initiated
prior to the agent preforming a task. The beneﬁt of Proac-
tive timing is that by informing the human supervisor what
is to occur, the supervisor is better prepared to understand
agent behavior instead of reacting to behavior that may not
be understood in the supervisor’s mental model without the
proactive information. An example of this is described by
Zhu and Williams [2020], where they identify proactive ex-
planations as a method of communicating logic rationale for
an agent’s actions prior to the agent performing these actio ns.
Concurrent Timing
In Concurrent timing , the meta-information ﬂow occurs at
the same time as the agent provides the recommendation or
course of action. The beneﬁt of Concurrent timing is that
the supervisor is informed at the point of having to react to
the agent and therefore best leverages the supervisor’s foc us.
The majority of the literature provides meta-information c on-
currently as a one-time ﬂow but can also be dynamically up-
dating as shown by McGuirl and Sarter [2006].
Post-Hoc Timing
In Post-Hoc timing, the meta-information ﬂow is provided af-
ter an agent provides a result or performs a course of action.
Post-hoc meta-information is provided in response to a re-
quest from the human supervisor to explain a previous behav-
ior (e.g., “Why did/didn’t you do that?,” “Why can’t you do
that?”) [de Graaf and Malle, 2017; Fox et al., 2017] or in the
case of a speciﬁc trigger, such as anomalous agent behavior
[Gregor and Benbasat, 1999].
4 Discussion
By performing this survey and developing this taxonomy, we
have gained insight into the breadth and direction of resear ch

--- PDF PAGE 6 ---
in trust calibration from a human-centered point of view. This
survey also provided us a unique view into the difﬁculty of
trust calibration and into future directions for our taxono my.
4.1 Difﬁculty of Trust Calibration
The reason why trust calibration is difﬁcult is that intelli -
gent agents suffer from a form of the Dunning–Kruger Effect
[Dunning, 2011]: Intelligent agents are too ignorant to kno w
how ignorant they are. More precisely: performing trust cal i-
bration forces the intelligent agent to provide cues to a hum an
supervisor indicating the agent’s own output is wrong even
when the agent does not know that it is wrong.
Meta-Information Recommendations
So what makes an intelligent agent wrong during operations?
Over-ﬁtting, not enough training, training not being an ac-
curate representation of operations, poor assumptions or a b-
stractions of the operational environment, the complexity of
the operations environment, and unforeseen operations sit ua-
tions are some examples of issues driving an intelligent age nt
to under-perform in operations. Since we believe these is-
sues drive an agent away from the as-developed performance
(e.g., test set accuracy), we recommend providing meta-
information content that helps identify a mismatch between
the training set and the current instance, or helps identify
incorrect modeling assumptions. These include Uncertainty
Content (especially for determining out-of-distribution) and
Sensitivity Content in the context of Graphical Modalities
(especially for highlighting salient features which drive de-
cisions) in Proactive and Concurrent Timings for operations.
Trust-Based Trust Calibration
Not all operations are the same. In low-stakes, ’every-
day’ operations (e.g., purchase recommenders), according to
Bunt et al. [2012], some human supervisors may be wary of
any meta-information that requires time and cognitive effo rt
unless it would enhance the speed or accuracy of the system.
In high-stakes operations (e.g., military, security, heal th care,
criminal justice), more meta-information may be required t o
ensure compliance with legal and ethical frameworks. Even
though these types of operations are vastly different, we be -
lieve both should adapt to human supervisors’ level of trust .
For example, Wintersberger et al. [2021] suggest that trust
calibration information should be provided to distrusting su-
pervisors, while not burdening supervisors with trust valu es
that are already high. Therefore we suggest that supervi-
sor trust level be an input to intelligent agents so that the
agent can vary the content, modality, timing, interactivit y,
and amount of trust calibration meta-information accordingly.
This construct allows for ﬂexibility in low-cost and high-c ost
operations as well as providing for cross over cases when a
low-cost user wants to understand more or when a high-cost
user wants communications brevity (e.g., time-critical mi li-
tary operations).
4.2 Future Directions
Now that meta-information content, modalities, interacti vity,
and timing are formalized in the taxonomy presented in this
paper, future studies can determine, for example: which in-
formation ﬂow content achieves the best human-agent part-
nership performance; whether information ﬂow content or
modality is what drives this performance; and which infor-
mation ﬂow content, modalities, interactivity, timings, a nd
amounts work best with which human supervisor characteris-
tics or groups.
One interesting follow on to formalizing meta-information
is to standardize this information. Standardization would in-
volve formally deﬁning each content, modality, interactiv ity,
and timing sub-category including the information formats
within each. Even though this may be a daunting task, the
beneﬁts could be substantial. For example, having standard -
ized trust calibration meta-information could improve rea l-
world adoption of intelligent agents, reduce the cost of inf ras-
tructure necessary to test and ﬁeld agents, reduce supervis or
training, and increase understanding during operations.
Another follow on area deals with meta-information tim-
ing. The majority of literature we surveyed on trust calibra -
tion and meta-information focused on information ﬂow be-
fore, during, or after performing a task, as we described in
Section 3.4. Achieving complementary performance, how-
ever, may require additional timing phases outside of the op -
erational task. For example, military supervisor-subordi nate
partnerships develop a ‘shared conﬁdence’ in team mem-
bers’ abilities over time during training exercises where
each side of the partnership gains understanding of how the
other will react and respond in different situations [USArm y,
2019]. Initial studies have shown that human-agent part-
nerships also function better during operations due to trai n-
ing exercises [Johnson et al., 2021] and pre-operations team
building[Walliser et al., 2019]. Therefore, an important area
of research would be to determine: what meta-information is
needed to support these pre-operations phases and how does
the training exercise and rehearsal meta-information diff er
from what is outlined in this paper.
5 Limitations
We chose to limit our survey to trust calibration between
a single human and a single agent. Due to this limitation,
trust calibration between humans and multi-agent systems
[Setter et al., 2017] and trust calibration between multiple
agents [Liu et al., 2016] are not discussed.
We also limited our survey to trust calibration meta in-
formation in support of individual decisions. Any addi-
tional meta-information necessary to support longitudina l
trust calibration [de Visser et al., 2020], such as reliability
[Lyons et al., 2021], was not covered.
We structured our survey based on information ﬂowing
from agent to human but acknowledge that there are other
very important information ﬂows present in trust calibra-
tion that were not covered since they do not originate from
the agent. This includes information ﬂows about task risk
[Devitt, 2018], task complexity [Hancock et al., 2011], and
task consequences [Ashoori and Weisz, 2019] which change
the threshold for trust.
Finally, since this paper focuses on information, other
factors such as agents’ physical presence and supervisors’

--- PDF PAGE 7 ---
subjective feelings toward intelligent agents [Khavas, 20 21;
Hancock et al., 2011] are not discussed.
6 Conclusions
We have presented a taxonomy based on a review of trust
calibration literature for single human to single agent int er-
actions. Through this survey we have distilled the content,
modality, interactivity, and timing of meta-information n ec-
essary to inform a trust calibration decision for intellige nt
agents. By focusing on information ﬂows, we have been able
to consider several directions to guide future research.
References
Alejandro Barredo Arrieta, Natalia D’iaz-Rodr’iguez,
Javier Del Ser, Adrien Bennetot, Siham Tabik, A. Bar-
bado, Salvador Garc’ia, Sergio Gil-L’opez, Daniel Molina,
Richard Benjamins, Raja Chatila, and Francisco Herrera.
Explainable artiﬁcial intelligence (xai): Concepts, tax-
onomies, opportunities and challenges toward responsible
ai. ArXiv, abs/1910.10045, 2020.
Maryam Ashoori and Justin D. Weisz. In ai we trust? fac-
tors that inﬂuence trustworthiness of ai-infused decision -
making processes. ArXiv, abs/1912.02675, 2019.
Edmond A wad, Sydney Levine, Max Kleiman-Weiner, So-
han Dsouza, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Azim F. Shariff, Jean-
Franc ¸ois Bonnefon, and Iyad Rahwan. Blaming humans
in autonomous vehicle accidents: Shared responsibility
across levels of automation. ArXiv, abs/1803.07170, 2018.
Umang Bhatt, Y unfeng Zhang, Javier Antor´ an,
Qingzi V era Liao, Prasanna Sattigeri, Riccardo Fogliato,
Gabrielle Gauthier Melanc ¸on, Ranganath Krishnan, Jason
Stanley, Omesh Tickoo, Lama Nachman, Rumi Chunara,
Adrian Weller, and Alice Xiang. Uncertainty as a form of
transparency: Measuring, communicating, and using un-
certainty. Proceedings of the 2021 AAAI/ACM Conference
on AI, Ethics, and Society , 2021.
Ingvild Bode and Tom Watts. Worried about the autonomous
weapons of the future? look at what’s already gone wrong.
https://thebulletin.org/2021/04/worried-about-the-a utonomous-weapons-of-the-future- \look-at-whats-already-gone-wrong/,
2021. Last Accessed: 2022-02-14.
Andrea Bunt, Matthew Lount, and Catherine Lauzon. Are
explanations always important?: a study of deployed, low-
cost intelligent interactive systems. In IUI ’12 , 2012.
Adrian Bussone, Simone Stumpf, and Dympna M.
O’Sullivan. The role of explanations on trust and reliance
in clinical decision support systems. 2015 International
Conference on Healthcare Informatics , pages 160–169,
2015.
Carrie J. Cai, Jonas Jongejan, and Jess Holbrook. The effect s
of example-based explanations in a machine learning inter-
face. Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on
Intelligent User Interfaces, 2019.
Hao Fei Cheng, Ruotong Wang, Zheng Zhang, Fiona
O’Connell, Terrance Gray, F. Maxwell Harper, and Haiyi
Zhu. Explaining decision-making algorithms through ui:
Strategies to help non-expert stakeholders. Proceedings of
the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, 2019.
Maartje de Graaf and Bertram F. Malle. How people explain
action (and autonomous intelligent systems should too). In
AAAI Fall Symposia, 2017.
Ewart de Visser, Marieke M. M. Peeters, Malte F. Jung,
Spencer Kohn, Tyler H. Shaw, Richard Pak, and Mark A.
Neerincx. Towards a theory of longitudinal trust calibra-
tion in human–robot teams. International Journal of Social
Robotics, 12:459–478, 2020.
Susannah Kate Devitt. Trustworthiness of autonomous sys-
tems. In CDC 2018, 2018.
Berkeley J. Dietvorst, Joseph P . Simmons, and Cade Massey.
Algorithm aversion: people erroneously avoid algorithms
after seeing them err. Journal of experimental psychology.
General, 144 1:114–26, 2015.
Jonathan Dodge, Qingzi V era Liao, Y unfeng Zhang, Rachel
K. E. Bellamy, and Casey Dugan. Explaining models: an
empirical study of how explanations impact fairness judg-
ment. Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on
Intelligent User Interfaces, 2019.
David Dunning. The dunning–kruger effect: On being igno-
rant of one’s own ignorance. In Advances in Experimental
Social Psychology, V olume 44, Academic Press, 2011.
Kate Ehrlich, Susanna E. Kirk, John F. Patterson, Jamie C.
Rasmussen, Steven I. Ross, and Dan Gruen. Taking ad-
vice from intelligent systems: the double-edged sword of
explanations. In IUI ’11 , 2011.
Upol Ehsan, Qingzi V era Liao, Michael J. Muller, Mark O.
Riedl, and Justin D. Weisz. Expanding explainability: To-
wards social transparency in ai systems. Proceedings of
the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Comput-
ing Systems, 2021.
Upol Ehsan, Samir Passi, Qingzi V era Liao, Larry Chan, I-
Hsiang Lee, Michael J. Muller, and Mark O. Riedl. The
who in explainable ai: How ai background shapes percep-
tions of ai explanations. ArXiv, abs/2107.13509, 2021.
Maria Fox, Derek Long, and Daniele Magazzeni. Explainable
planning. ArXiv, abs/1709.10256, 2017.
Shirley D Gregor and Izak Benbasat. Explanations from intel-
ligent systems: Theoretical foundations and implications
for practice. MIS Q., 23:497–530, 1999.
Riccardo Guidotti, Anna Monreale, Franco Turini, Dino Pe-
dreschi, and Fosca Giannotti. A survey of methods for
explaining black box models. ACM Computing Surveys
(CSUR), 51:1 – 42, 2019.
Peter A. Hancock, Deborah R. Billings, Kristin E. Schaefer,
Jessie Y .C. Chen, Ewart de Visser, and Raja Parasuraman.
A meta-analysis of factors affecting trust in human-robot
interaction. Human Factors: The Journal of Human Fac-
tors and Ergonomics Society , 53:517 – 527, 2011.
Johan Huysmans, Karel Dejaeger, Christophe Mues, Jan V an-
thienen, and Bart Baesens. An empirical evaluation of the

--- PDF PAGE 8 ---
comprehensibility of decision table, tree and rule based
predictive models. Decis. Support Syst., 51:141–154, 2011.
Craig J. Johnson, Mustafa Demir, Nathan J. Mcneese,
Jamie C. Gorman, Alexandra T. Wolff, and Nancy J.
Cooke. The impact of training on human-autonomy team
communications and trust calibration. Human factors ,
page 187208211047323, 2021.
Zahra Rezaei Khavas. A review on trust in human-robot in-
teraction. ArXiv, abs/2105.10045, 2021.
Johannes Kunkel, Tim Donkers, Lisa Michael, Catalin-Mihai
Barbu, and J¨ urgen Ziegler. Let me explain: Impact of
personal and impersonal explanations on trust in recom-
mender systems. Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 2019.
Vivian Lai and Chenhao Tan. On human predictions with
explanations and predictions of machine learning mod-
els: A case study on deception detection. Proceedings
of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Trans-
parency, 2019.
John D. Lee and Katrina A. See. Trust in automation: Design-
ing for appropriate reliance. Human Factors: The Journal
of Human Factors and Ergonomics Society , 46:50 – 80,
2004.
Timothy B. Lee. Police: Uber driver was stream-
ing hulu just before fatal self-driving car crash.
https://arstechnica.com/cars/2018/06/police-uber-dr iver-was-streaming-hulu-just-before-fatal \self-driving-car-crash/,
2018. Last Accessed: 2022-02-07.
Ling Liu, Margaret L. Loper, Y usuf ¨Ozkaya, Abdurrahman
Y as ¸ar, and Emre Yigitoglu. Machine to machine trust in
the iot era. In TRUST@AAMAS, 2016.
Ethan Lowens. Accuracy is not enough: The task mismatch
explanation of algorithm aversion and its policy implica-
tions. Harvard Journal of Law & T echnology, V ol. 34, No.
1, 2020.
David Lyell and Enrico W . Coiera. Automation bias and ver-
iﬁcation complexity: a systematic review. Journal of the
American Medical Informatics Association , 24:423–431,
2017.
Joseph B. Lyons, Thy V o, Kevin T. Wynne, Sean Mahoney,
Chang Soo Nam, and Darci Gallimore. Trusting au-
tonomous security robots: The role of reliability and state d
social intent. Human Factors: The Journal of Human Fac-
tors and Ergonomics Society , 63:603 – 618, 2021.
John M. McGuirl and Nadine B. Sarter. Supporting trust cali-
bration and the effective use of decision aids by presenting
dynamic system conﬁdence information. Human Factors:
The Journal of Human Factors and Ergonomics Society ,
48:656 – 665, 2006.
Tim Miller. Explanation in artiﬁcial intelligence: Insigh ts
from the social sciences. Artif. Intell., 267:1–38, 2019.
Bonnie M. Muir. Trust between humans and machines, and
the design of decision aids. Int. J. Man Mach. Stud. ,
27:527–539, 1987.
James Austin Schaffer, John O’Donovan, James R.
Michaelis, Adrienne Jeanisha Raglin, and Tobias H¨ ollerer.
I can do better than your ai: expertise and explanations.
Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on Intel-
ligent User Interfaces, 2019.
Tina Setter, Andrea Gasparri, and Magnus Egerstedt. Trust
in multi-agent networks: From self-centered to team-
oriented. 2017 American Control Conference (ACC), pages
997–1002, 2017.
Fabian Sperrle, Mennatallah El-Assady, Grace Guo,
Duen Horng Chau, Alex Endert, and Daniel A. Keim.
Should we trust (x)ai? design dimensions for structured
experimental evaluations. ArXiv, abs/2009.06433, 2020.
Martin Svrcek, Michal Kompan, and M´ aria Bielikov´ a. To-
wards understandable personalized recommendations: Hy-
brid explanations. Comput. Sci. Inf. Syst. , 16:179–203,
2019.
Richard J. Tomsett, Alun David Preece, Dave Braines, Fed-
erico Cerutti, Supriyo Chakraborty, Mani B. Srivastava,
Gavin Pearson, and Lance M. Kaplan. Rapid trust calibra-
tion through interpretable and uncertainty-aware ai. Pat-
terns, 1, 2020.
USArmy. Army doctrine publica-
tion (adp) 6-0, mission command.
https://armypubs.army.mil/ProductMaps/PubForm/Details.aspx?PUB
ID=1007502,
2019. Last Accessed: 2022-02-09.
James Walliser, Ewart J. de Visser, Eva Wiese, and Tyler H.
Shaw. Team structure and team building improve hu-
man–machine teaming with autonomous agents. Journal
of Cognitive Engineering and Decision Making , 13:258 –
278, 2019.
Xinru Wang and Ming Yin. Are explanations helpful? a com-
parative study of the effects of explanations in ai-assiste d
decision-making. 26th International Conference on Intel-
ligent User Interfaces, 2021.
Ning Wang, David V . Pynadath, and Susan G. Hill. Trust cal-
ibration within a human-robot team: Comparing automati-
cally generated explanations. 2016 11th ACM/IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI) ,
pages 109–116, 2016.
Philipp Wintersberger, Frederica Janotta, Jakob Peintner, An-
dreas L¨ ocken, and Andreas Riener. Evaluating feedback
requirements for trust calibration in automated vehicles. it
- Information T echnology, 63:111 – 122, 2021.
Jingkang Y ang, Kaiyang Zhou, Yixuan Li, and Ziwei Liu.
Generalized out-of-distribution detection: A survey. ArXiv,
abs/2110.11334, 2021.
Y unfeng Zhang, Qingzi V era Liao, and Rachel K. E. Bellamy.
Effect of conﬁdence and explanation on accuracy and trust
calibration in ai-assisted decision making. Proceedings
of the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and
Transparency, 2020.
Lixiao Zhu and Thomas Emrys Williams. Effects of proac-
tive explanations by robots on human-robot trust. In ICSR,
2020.