--- PDF PAGE 1 ---
. 
. 
Latest updates: hps://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3712005
. 
. 
RESEARCH-ARTICLE
The Current Challenges of Soware Engineering in the
Era of Large Language Models
CUIYUN GAO, Harbin Institute of Technology Shenzhen, Shenzhen,
Guangdong, China
. 
XING HU, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
. 
SHAN GAO, Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd., Shenzhen, Guangdong, China
. 
XIN XIA, Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd., Shenzhen, Guangdong, China
. 
ZHI JIN, Peking University, Beijing, China
. 
. 
. 
Open Access Support provided by:
. 
Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.
. 
Zhejiang University
. 
Harbin Institute of Technology Shenzhen
. 
Peking University
. 
PDF Download
3712005.pdf
20 January 2026
Total Citations: 13
Total Downloads:
2941
. 
. 
Published: 27 May 2025
Online AM: 13 January 2025
Accepted: 18 December 2024
Revised: 18 December 2024
Received: 05 April 2024
. 
. 
Citation in BibTeX format
. 
. 
ACM Transactions on Soware Engineering and Methodology, Volume 34, Issue 5 (June 2025)
hps://doi.org/10.1145/3712005
EISSN: 1557-7392
.


--- PDF PAGE 2 ---
The Current Challenges of Software Engineering in the Era of
Large Language Models
CUIYUN GAO, Harbin Institute of Technology Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China
XING HU, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
SHAN GAO, Huawei Technologies Co Ltd China, Hangzhou, China
XIN XIA, Software Engineering Application Lab, Huawei Technologies Co Ltd, Hangzhou, China
ZHI JIN, Peking University, Beijing, China
With the advent of large language models (LLMs) in the AI area, the field of software engineering (SE) has
also witnessed a paradigm shift. These models, by leveraging the power of deep learning and massive amounts
of data, have demonstrated an unprecedented capacity to understand, generate, and operate programming
languages. They can assist developers in completing a broad spectrum of software development activities,
encompassing software design, automated programming, and maintenance, which potentially reduces huge hu-
man efforts. Integrating LLMs within the SE landscape (LLM4SE) has become a burgeoning trend, necessitating
exploring this emergent landscape’s challenges and opportunities.
The article aims at revisiting the software development lifecycle (SDLC) under LLMs, and highlighting
challenges and opportunities of the new paradigm. The article first summarizes the overall process of LLM4SE,
and then elaborates on the current challenges based on a through discussion. The discussion was held
among more than 20 participants from academia and industry, specializing in fields such as SE and artificial
intelligence. Specifically, we achieve 26 key challenges from seven aspects, including software requirement
and design, coding assistance, testing code generation, code review, code maintenance, software vulnerability
management, and data, training, and evaluation. We hope the achieved challenges would benefit future
research in the LLM4SE field.
CCS Concepts: • Software and its engineering → Software development techniques;
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Large Language Models, Challenges, LLM4SE
ACM Reference format:
Cuiyun Gao, Xing Hu, Shan Gao, Xin Xia, and Zhi Jin. 2025. The Current Challenges of Software Engineering
in the Era of Large Language Models. ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol. 34, 5, Article 127 (May 2025), 30 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3712005
This research is supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (Project Nos. 62472126, 62192731, and 62192730),
Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Province (Project No. 2023A1515011959), Shenzhen-Hong Kong Jointly Funded
Project (Category A, No. SGDX20230116091246007), Shenzhen Basic Research (General Project No. JCYJ20220531095214031),
Shenzhen International Science and Technology Cooperation Project (No. GJHZ20220913143008015), and CCF-Huawei
Populus Grove Fund.
Authors’ Contact Information: Cuiyun Gao, Harbin Institute of Technology Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China; e-mail:
gaocuiyun@hit.edu.cn; Xing Hu (corresponding author), Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China; e-mail: xinghu@zju.edu.cn;
Shan Gao, Huawei Technologies Co Ltd China, Hangzhou, China; e-mail: gaoshan17@huawei.com; Xin Xia, Software Engi-
neering Application Lab, Huawei Technologies Co Ltd, Hangzhou, China; e-mail: xin.xia@acm.org; Zhi Jin (corresponding
author), Peking University, Beijing, China; e-mail: zhijin@pku.edu.cn.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the
full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM 1557-7392/2025/5-ART127
https://doi.org/10.1145/3712005
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 5, Article 127. Publication date: May 2025.

--- PDF PAGE 3 ---
127:2 C. Gao et al.
1 Introduction
In the 1960s, software engineering (SE) was formally established as a discipline in response to
software’s increasing scale and complexity [ 126], based on the symposium on SE organized by
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. In the nascent stage of SE, during which AI techniques
were not widely adopted, the field was more focused on structured programming [ 94], modular
design [ 136], and data structure [ 59], which greatly promoted the widespread application of
programming languages and compiler systems. Along with the explosive development of object-
oriented programming and cloud computing, and continuing maturity of the AI techniques, the
field of intelligent SE (also called AI4SE) [56] has gradually emerged. In the field, AI techniques have
been introduced into various stages of the software development lifecycle (SDLC), including
programming, testing, and maintenance, aiming at boosting the efficiency and quality of software
development. Nowadays, AI4SE is still playing an increasingly essential role in a growing number
of SE domains, including but not limited to intelligent requirements analysis and design [ 20, 118],
automated code generation and repair [ 70, 90, 109], as well as intelligent project management [ 7,
93]. According to Gartner’s report for 2023 [ 50], artificial intelligence-augmented SE is listed as
one of the top strategic technology trends in SE, indicating the general trend of enhancing SE with
AI techniques.
Recently, the rapid advancement of the Artificial Intelligence Generated Content technology
[22], especially large language models (LLMs) [42, 181], is ushering in new challenges and
opportunities for the SE field, and displays potential for transforming the software development
paradigm. LLM-based software engineering (also called LLM4SE) has attracted widespread attention
from both academia and industry. The practical application of tools such as GitLab Duo [ 37]
and GitHub Copilot X [ 29] have demonstrated the broad prospects of LLM4SE, inspiring new
software development mode. Specifically, by breaking through the traditional multi-stage software
development process, LLM4SE would make an end-to-end software development possible, i.e.,
generating and testing code directly based on given requirements.
The prospects of LLM4SE have acted as the “catfish effect, ” promoting the exploration of new
software development modes among academia and industry. However, due to limitations such as the
essential semantic gap between code and natural languages, constantly updated data and models,
and instability of generated results, existing LLM4SE techniques are still faced with serious chal-
lenges regarding the quality, efficiency, reliability, and trustworthiness of developed software. The
challenges have also sparked a new wave of enthusiasm for SE technologies. To better understand
the issues in the current SE stage, 24 academia researchers and industry practitioners, specializing in
different fields such as SE and artificial intelligence, were grouped to discuss the opportunities and
challenges in the era of LLM4SE from 19 January 2024 to 21 January 2024 at the “9th CCF Beautiful
Lake Seminars” [ 1]. Based on the rigorous discussion, the article summarizes 26 key challenges
from seven aspects, including software requirement and design, coding assistance, testing code
generation, code review, software maintenance, software vulnerability management, and data,
training, and engineering. This article aims to provide insights for researchers and practitioners to
effectively harness LLMs’ strengths while mitigating their weaknesses, thereby applying them to
support continuous and robust software development.
The major contributions of this article are summarized as follows:
(1) We perform a qualitative study to investigate and summarize the current challenges of
LLM4SE.
(2) We achieve findings from various aspects in LLM4SE, and provide practical implications for
researchers and practitioners to inspire future avenues of research.
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 5, Article 127. Publication date: May 2025.

--- PDF PAGE 4 ---
The Current Challenges of SE in the Era of Large Language Models 127:3
Fig. 1. Overall process of LLM4SE.
The remainder of this article is structured as follows: Section 2 provides the background of our
work, including the overall process of LLM4SE and common techniques in each step. Section 3
describes our methodology for investigating the challenges in LLM4SE. Sections 4 and 5 present
the summarized challenges and related work, respectively. Section 6 discusses the threats to the
validity of our work, and Section 7 concludes the article.
2 Background
In this section, we first illustrate the overall process of LLM4SE, and then elaborate on the details
in each step including the data construction, fine-tuning techniques, SE-specific LLMs, prompt
tuning techniques, and downstream tasks.
2.1 Overall Process of LLM4SE
Figure 1 presents the overall process of the integration of LLM into SE applications, including
data construction, fine-tuning, prompting techniques, and SE-specific LLMs. With the support
of SE-specific LLMs, multiple SE tasks (e.g., design, coding, testing, reviewing, maintenance, and
vulnerability management) can be enhanced substantially.
2.2 Data Construction
The remarkable performance of the previously mentioned large code models can be attributed
to the extensive dataset and the meticulously structured data organization employed during the
model’s pre-training phase.
2.2.1 Data Collection. Data collection is the basic step for constructing a high-quality corpus of
source code. A common solution is to collect publicly available source code data from GitHub or
public archive [98]. For instance, Guo et al. [ 54] crawl public repositories created before February
2023 on GitHub with 87 programming languages. The StarCoder2 team collects the source code
from the Software Heritage archive [ 3]. Then the authors start by extracting the most recently
crawled versions of all GitHub repositories and filtering them to retain only the main branch.
2.2.2 Data Filtering. Source code data from public repositories may not always be clean or
useful, and malicious data may harm model performance and leak confidential user data. Therefore,
delicate data filtering is also crucial for powerful large code models. According to Lozhkov et al.
[98], many filtering rules are applied for StarCoder2, including (1) Long line filters to eliminate too
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 5, Article 127. Publication date: May 2025.

--- PDF PAGE 5 ---
127:4 C. Gao et al.
long code lines, (2) Auto-generated filter to remove auto-generated files such as compilation files,
(3) Alpha filter to remove files with less than 25% of alphabetic characters, and (4) Encoded data
filter to remove content about encoding data.
2.2.3 Data Organization. According to the work [ 54], there exists an inter-relationship among
the files of source code. Thus, the authors propose a Topological Sort for Dependency Analysis
algorithm for organizing code files. Based on the dependencies, models are trained with the files in
a certain order to learn such dependencies. For StarCoder2 [ 98], authors utilize different special
tokens such as < 2><<8C > to represent different data types, such as commit messages.
2.3 Fine-Tuning Techniques
Through pre-training, LLMs learn a huge amount of knowledge about SE and source code. However,
LLMs are not aligned with human preference, resulting in their limited capabilities to serve as
intelligent assistants. Therefore, to better adapt LLMs for software development practice, researchers
primarily focus on four tuning techniques: adapter-based tuning, low-rank adaptation (LoRA),
prefix tuning, and prompt tuning.
2.3.1 Adapter-Based Tuning. Adapter-based tuning introduces adapter modules with a bottle-
neck structure between the layers of pre-trained models. In the fine-tuning stage, the parameters
of the original pretrained models are fixed, and only adapter modules are adjusted. In particular,
Wang et al. [ 152] introduce adapter tuning to improve code search and summarization by adding a
small number of trainable parameters to pre-trained models. Their approach reduces catastrophic
forgetting in LLM and achieves superior performance in cross-lingual and low-resource scenarios.
2.3.2 LoRA. LoRA injects trainable rank decomposition matrices into pretrained models to
substitute the original weights, which can amplify some hidden features encoded during pre-
training. In the study by Liu et al. [ 95], they explore how LoRA modifies pre-trained models for
code-change tasks by injecting low-rank matrices that substitute original weights. Through this
method, they effectively captures dynamic code changes while reducing the need for extensive
retraining.
2.3.3 Prefix Tuning. Prefix tuning introduces a set of prefix parameters to the beginning of
each layer in the LLM. These parameters serve as adjustments that precede the original input
during processing. LLaMA-Adapter [188] incorporates a set of trainable adaptation embeddings and
attaches them to the word embeddings in the upper layers of the LLMs. A zero-initialized attention
scheme with zero gating is also introduced. It dynamically incorporates new guiding signals into
LLaMA while retaining its pretrained knowledge.
2.3.4 Prompt Tuning. Prompt tuning modifies an LLM’s input by incorporating a natural lan-
guage prompt designed to predict masked tokens. This adjustment maintains the input format
consistent with that used during the model’s pre-training, facilitating more effective task-specific
adjustments. For instance, Wang et al. [ 149] apply prompt tuning to pre-trained models like Code-
BERT and CodeT5 and showing its effectiveness over fine-tuning in various code intelligence tasks
at low-resource scenario. The inserted natural language prompt can involve task-specific knowledge
to facilitate the adaption to downstream tasks.
2.4 SE-Specific LLMs
At the end of 2021, OpenAI released CodeX [ 25] as the first LLM designed explicitly for code
generation. With a similar architecture to GPT-3 [ 19], CodeX was pre-trained using 159 GB of
public code data from GitHub. Based on CodeX, the Copilot plugin [ 29] has become one of the most
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 5, Article 127. Publication date: May 2025.

--- PDF PAGE 6 ---
The Current Challenges of SE in the Era of Large Language Models 127:5
popular tools for code generation. Additionally, the HumanEval dataset proposed in the work [ 25]
has become one of the standard evaluation datasets for subsequent code generation tasks. In 2022,
DeepMind proposed AlphaCode [ 88], a model that employed an encoder-decoder architecture and
was pre-trained on 715.1 GB of code data across 12 programming languages. It surpassed 54.3% of
human programmers in a CodeForce competition with 5,000 participants.
In recent years, a growing number of open source SE-Specific LLMs have been proposed. In
2020, Microsoft proposed CodeGPT [ 138], based on the architecture of GPT-2, which was used to
support the embedded code completion tool of Visual Studio. Wang et al. proposed CodeT5 [ 156]
that follows an encoder-decoder architecture to support various code intelligence tasks, including
code translation and code summarization. Salesforce proposed CodeGEN [ 114], an open source
model with 1.61 billion parameters, pre-trained on over 800 GB of data. Unlike other models that
generate code in a single step, CodeGEN facilitates conversational program generation. The process
of code generation with the help of the model can be seen as a multi-round dialogue between
the user and the model, where the user provides requirements for the code generation model in
multiple instances and receives several outputs from the model.
In addition, Meta AI proposed CodeLLaMA, a family of code LLMs based on LLaMA 2 [ 127]
with the capabilities of code generation, blank infilling, and long-context processing. The BigCode
project introduced StarCoder [ 86], an LLM trained on the mixture of source code and natural
language texts. Its training data incorporate more than 80 different programming languages, as
well as text extracted from GitHub issues and commits and from notebooks. The total account of
training tokens exceeds 1T. Based on CodeLLaMA, Guo et al. proposed DeepSeek-Coder [ 54], which
is a series of code LLMs that have an identical architecture to CodeLLaMA. DeepSeek-Coder is
trained from 2T tokens from scratch, which comprises 87% code and 13% natural language in both
English and Chinese. DeepSeek-Coder has achieved state-of-the-art performance in various code
intelligence tasks, e.g., code generation and code completion. Lozhkov et al. proposed StarCoder2
[98] and a larger-scale source code dataset named The Stack V2. Based on purely open sourced
data, StarCoder2 achieves state-of-the-art effectiveness in math and code reasoning benchmarks,
as well as several low-resource languages. The aiXcoder team has launched aiXcoder-7B [ 71], a
lightweight and effective LLM for code completion. More LLMs for SE are illustrated in Table 1.
2.5 Prompting Techniques
Prompting techniques are the key factors in adapting LLMs into SE practice. In this section,
we categorize the prompting techniques into two types including training-time and test-time
techniques.
Training-Time Techniques. Wang et al. [ 149, 150] observe that prompt tuning that is equipped
with the templates describing task formulation and specification can further boost the performance
in downstream tasks compared to fine-tuning. Luo et al. [ 104] utilize the prompting techniques
Evol-Instruct [170] to construct a more complex dataset and adopt a delicately designed template
to describe the task in the training process.
Test-Time Techniques. A direct way to use LLMs in SE tasks is zero-shot prompting, which describes
the task and obtains answers from LLMs. To make LLMs further understand the task, few-shot
prompting is proposed [ 19] (is also called in-context prompting). Before asking the question,
multiple input-output pairs are selected as examples to present to LLMs. With the demonstrated
examples, LLMs can further understand the task specification and output format, producing better
performance [49]. In addition, to further specify the task and improve the reasoning capabilities of
LLMs, Wei et al. propose chain-of-thought (CoT) [158] that prompts LLMs the detailed reasoning
process instead of directly showing the answer, substantially improving the performance of LLMs.
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 5, Article 127. Publication date: May 2025.

--- PDF PAGE 7 ---
127:6 C. Gao et al.
Table 1. LLMs for SE
Model Developer Release Date Parameter Quantity (B) Pre-Trained Data Size Architecture
CodeX [25] OpenAI 2021.07 2.5/12 100B tokens Decoder
AlphaCode [88] DeepMind 2022.02 41 967B tokens Encoder-decoder
CodeGen [114] Salesforce 2022.03 2.7/6.1/16 577B tokens Decoder
AiXcoder L AiXcoder 2022.04 - - Decoder
AiXcoder XL [55] AiXcoder 2022.06 - - Decoder
PanGu-Coder [28] HUA WEI 2022.07 2.6 147 GB Decoder
CodeGeeX [191] Zhipu.AI 2022.09 13 850B tokens Decoder
BLOOM [128] BigScience 2022.09 176 1.61 TB Decoder
PaLM-Coder [27] Google 2022.10 8/62/540 780B tokens Decoder
SantaCoder [9] Huggingface 2023.01 1.1 118B tokens Decoder
InCoder [46] Facebook 2023.04 1.3/6.7 216 GB Decoder
StarCoder [86] Huggingface 2023.05 15.5 1T tokens Decoder
CodeGen2 [113] Salesforce 2023.05 3.7/7/16 400B tokens Decoder
CodeT5+ [154] Salesforce 2023.05 2/6/16 51.1B tokens Encoder-decoder
WizardCoder [104] Microsoft 2023.06 15 - Decoder
Phi-1 [52] Microsoft 2023.06 13 7B tokens Decoder
PanGu-Coder2 [129] HUA WEI 2023.07 15 - Decoder
CodeLLaMa [127] Meta 2023.08 7/13/34 116K tokens Decoder
CodeQwen [12] Alibaba 2023.09 7/14 90B tokens Decoder
Phi-1.5 [87] Microsoft 2023.09 1.3 27B tokens Decoder
DeepSeek-Coder [54] DeepSeek AI 2023.11 1/5.7/6.7/33 2T tokens Decoder
Phi-2 Microsoft 2023.12 2.7 1.4T tokens Decoder
AlphaCode2 DeepMind 2023.12 - - Decoder
Magicoder [159] UIUC and THU 2023.12 7 - Decoder
WaveCoder [179] Microsoft 2024.01 15 - Decoder
StarCoder2 [98] Huggingface 2024.01 3/7/15 622B+/658B+/913B+ tokens Decoder
CodeQwen1.5 Alibaba 2024.04 7 3T tokens Decoder
SEMCODER [33] Columbia University 2024.06 6.7 - Decoder
DeepSeek-Code-V2 [30] DeepSeek AI 2024.06 16/236 10.2T tokens MoE
Qwen2.5-Coder [173] Alibaba 2024.09 1.5/7/32 5.5T tokens Decoder
The symbol “-” indicates the corresponding value is not publicly accessible.
Equipped with CoT, LLMs have also been proven to present a better performance in SE tasks such
as code generation [ 54].
2.6 Downstream Tasks
The LLM4SE workflow can be applied to various SE tasks, including software requirement and
design, coding assistance, testing code generation, code review, software maintenance, and software
vulnerability management. Specifically, for the software requirement and design task, LLMs can
serve as a knowledge base for software design, or conduct code-centric software design, and so on.
For the coding assistance, LLMs are beneficial for a series of tasks, including code retrieval and
recommendation, code pattern mining, code completion and generation, and intelligent Q&A. For
testing code generation, LLMs could support threading test, test coverage analysis, and AI-enhanced
fuzzing. For the software maintenance, LLMs are able to support many tasks such as log mining,
anomaly detection, and user review analysis. Finally, for the software vulnerability management,
LLMs can facilitate vulnerability awareness and traceability, binary analysis, and supply chain
analysis.
3 Methodology
To investigate the challenges in LLM4SE, 24 participants with experience in software development
had face-to-face meetings in the “9th CCF Beautiful Lake Seminars” during 19 January 2014 to 21
January 2024. The participants include 17 academic researchers and 7 industry practitioners, spe-
cializing in different fields such as SE and machine learning. Six thematic sessions were performed,
namely “Software Engineering under Large Models, ” “Large Models for Code Intelligence, ” “Large
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 5, Article 127. Publication date: May 2025.

--- PDF PAGE 8 ---
The Current Challenges of SE in the Era of Large Language Models 127:7
Models for Software Quality Assurance, ” “Data, Evaluation, and Validation for Large Code Models, ”
“Large Models for Open-Source Engineering, ” and “Future Trends and Challenges of LLM4SE, ”
each followed by a panel or collective discussion, with detailed topics illustrated in the public
repository.1 Each thematic seminar together with the discussion lasted for around 4 hours for
ensuring the corresponding topics were thoroughly discussed. We performed the following coding
procedures to summarize the discussed challenges.
(1) Transcribing and coding . Following the procedure in the work [ 62, 148], the first author
transcribes the discussion of each seminar and uses NVivo [ 38] to conduct open coding and
generate opinion cards. Then another author verifies the summarized opinion cards and provides
suggestions for improvement.
(2) Open card sorting. The two authors then separately grouped the codes into potential challenges
for thematic similarity according to the study by LaToza et al. [ 79]. The two authors discuss their
disagreements to reach a common decision. To reduce the bias of the two authors in sorting
descriptions, another two authors have also reviewed and confirmed the final set of challenges.
Finally, we derived 26 key challenges corresponding to seven aspects, with details illustrated in
Section 4.
4 Current Challenges in LLM4SE
In this section, we present the challenges of LLM4SE. We introduce them from six aspects, including
the challenges in the SE process, e.g., software requirement and design, coding assistance, testing,
code analysis and review, software vulnerability management, as well as the challenges relevant to
the construction of SE-specific LLMs, e.g., challenges in data, training, and evaluation.
4.1 Challenges in Requirement and Design
Requirement [115] and design [ 176] constitute critical phases in the software development process,
and serve as initial stages of the process. The primary challenges stem from two main aspects,
including the inherent complexity of real-world problems and communication barriers between
domain experts and software developers. These two aspects lead to increased uncertainty in defining
requirements during the early stages of development, and thereby unexpected design. The powerful
capabilities of LLMs in natural language processing can effectively mitigate expression uncertainties,
thereby beneficial for addressing the challenges encountered during the requirements and design
stages. However, how to ensure that LLMs can effectively capture the intricate requirements and
design in the complex software still remains challenging.
(1) Requirement/design prompts. LLMs heavily rely on comprehensive prompts and available
contextual information to generate effective outputs. Even slightly different prompts can lead to
significantly different results [149]. Besides, it is hard to render the prompts anticipate the costs and
risk of the generated requirements/design [ 166]. Therefore, when employing LLMs as requirement
and design agents, it is essential to conduct thorough empirical evaluations on the prompts.
(2) Structured descriptions of the communication between domain experts and software developers .
LLMs present inherent limitations in context length and inductive bias (influenced by training data)
[82]. For instance, the context length of ChatGPT (e.g., gpt-3.5-turbo) is restricted to 16,385 tokens,
which is usually sufficient but still hard to process lengthy requirement documents or maintain the
task context over extended conversations.
(3) Lack of domain expert knowledge . Requirements engineers are generally required to compre-
hend the application domain for accurate and complete requirement extraction. However, LLMs
may have limited training on specific domain knowledge, necessitating the integration of domain
1https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1ewVENYYq1UyKBQDaAgC8-45WMI8fNCREJdlGHgRdGbg/edit?usp=sharing
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 5, Article 127. Publication date: May 2025.

--- PDF PAGE 9 ---
127:8 C. Gao et al.
knowledge through experts, or fine-tuned LLMs tailored for the domain. Without clear software
requirements, it would be challenging to produce accurate software design.
(4) Evolvability of software requirements . The evolution of requirements is the origin of software
evolution. Prior studies [ 17, 174] more focus on fixed requirements, ignoring the evolvability of
software requirements. How to incorporate LLMs into the adaptive perception and generation of
evolving requirements has not received attention.
(5) Comprehensive evaluation of generated requirements and design . As defined in ISO 29148 [ 69],
the quality of software requirements should be measured in various characteristics, including
completeness, correctness, verifiability, unambiguousness, singularity, and feasibility, and so on
[102]. The generated software design is expected to include concrete design specifications, domain-
specific languages (DSLs) , and explore alternative architectures [ 166]. How to automate the
evaluation of LLM-based software requirements and design process has received scant attention.
(6) Inconsistency between software modeling and natural language descriptions . Prior studies [ 10,
21, 24, 124] have demonstrated the software modeling capabilities of LLMs, such as generating
unified modeling languages (UMLs) based on user stories, classifying model repositories, and so
on. Although LLMs can generate syntactically correct UML code, they are struggling with semantic
quality and tend to align poorly with natural languages, especially when the diagram scale is large.
Summary. The area of LLM for requirement and design still faces several challenges, including
effective requirement/design prompts, structured descriptions of the communication between
domain experts and software developers, lack of domain knowledge, dynamics of software
requirements, comprehensive evaluation, and inconsistency in software modeling.
4.2 Challenges in Coding Assistance
During the software development cycle, the advent of code generation technologies powered by
LLMs has greatly improved development efficiency and code quality, allowing developers to address
business challenges instead of engaging in monotonous coding tasks. Despite the opportunities
these advanced models introduce to code generation, they also present notable challenges.
(1) Inaccurate generated code caused by hallucination in LLMs . Even the most advanced LLMs may
generate results that contradict the facts [ 23], compromising their reliability in code generation
applications. This problem becomes especially critical in high-risk settings where strict compli-
ance with specific application requirements is essential. The potential for inaccuracies in these
environments underscores the substantial risks of deploying such models in production scenarios.
(2) Introduction of vulnerabilities in generated code . The pre-training datasets for LLMs are pri-
marily from open source code repositories. Contributors to these repositories come from different
backgrounds and possess varying levels of expertise, leading to numerous security vulnerabili-
ties in the code. When LLMs learn from such datasets, they may unintentionally replicate these
security issues in their outputs [ 153]. Deploying models trained on these data in real-world devel-
opment projects can inadvertently introduce these vulnerabilities, posing risks with unforeseen
consequences.
(3) Limited generation performance for new programming languages . The advent of emerging
programming languages such as Rust presents a challenge due to the scarcity of available training
data. Despite an urgent need for programming assistants to lower the barrier to entry and promote
these new languages, the contradiction between the scarcity of training data and the pressing need
for promotion poses a considerable challenge in creating effective LLMs-based code generation
assistants.
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 5, Article 127. Publication date: May 2025.

--- PDF PAGE 10 ---
The Current Challenges of SE in the Era of Large Language Models 127:9
(4) Insufficient evaluation methods for machine-generated code . Currently, the evaluation of code
generation models primarily utilizes datasets like HumanEval [ 25] and MBPP [11], characterized by
their simple and direct test cases. However, real development scenarios demand that models handle
complex real-world code involving interactions across multiple methods and files to complete tasks
[34]. To effectively evaluate the capabilities of LLMs in code generation, it is crucial to incorporate
this complexity of real-world development environments.
(5) Efficient integration of the generated code into projects . Currently, most of the code generated
by an LLM can solve common coding problems, e.g., algorithm problems. However, when given a
coding task (e.g., adding a new feature or fixing a bug) in a real project, developers need to first
identify the locations where they need to write/modify the code, and then complete the project-
specific code [ 183]. Note that the newly added code should follow the coding style of the current
project and call relevant APIs within the project. It is challenging for LLMs to well capture the
project-level knowledge, remember the relevant APIs, identify the coding positions, and provide
maintainable code with same coding styles.
Summary. For code generation, it needs to overcome numerous challenges posed by LLMs,
such as issues with accuracy of generation, security vulnerabilities, insufficient support for
new programming languages, inadequacies in evaluation methods, and efficient integration of
the generated code into projects, to ensure the effective and safe application of LLMs.
4.3 Challenges in Testing Code Generation
The remarkable performance capability of LLMs offers new opportunities for research in software
testing, especially unit test generation. The industry currently utilizes LLMs for unit test generation
mainly involving two steps: first combining the method under test with its code context into a
prompt for querying LLMs, and then refining the LLMs’ output through text post-processing to
ensure the successful compilation and execution.
The challenges for high-quality test cases are twofold, encompassing syntactics and semantics
aspects. Specifically, at the syntactics level, the test code must be compiled and executed correctly.
At the semantic level, the test code should comprehensively cover the tested code and support
defect detection throughout the process in SDLC for maintaining code quality. Although LLMs
can generate test code currently [ 110, 180], providing high-quality test cases that satisfy both
syntactical correctness and comprehensive semantic coverage remains a considerable challenge.
(1) The syntactics-related challenge. In unit testing, the generated test code often contains code
elements that cannot be successfully parsed by compilers [ 132] (e.g., undeclared variable types or
non-existent identifiers) and non-code texts (e.g., explanatory natural language text). This limits
their practical application in software development, as developers cannot directly utilize these
outputs. Therefore, the challenge is to guide or constrain LLMs to reduce texts that cause compilation
errors and to enhance the syntax compilation success rate of generated test cases. Two solutions to
address this challenge include model fine-tuning ( supervised fine-tuning (SFT)) [130], which
manually collects and annotates test code with specific formats to fine-tune the model for satisfying
syntax requirements, and prompt engineering, which involves instructions in the prompts to guide
the model not to output irrelevant code/texts. However, developing these techniques to keep pace
with the evolving capabilities of LLMs remains a significant challenge.
(2) The semantics-related challenge . First, when ensuring that the test code can be compiled
successfully, we then need to inspect whether the test cases can cover all executable paths of the
code under test. To achieve comprehensive path coverage, test cases are expected to be diverse. This
involves specifying preconditions such as inputs, external dependencies, and environmental states
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 5, Article 127. Publication date: May 2025.

--- PDF PAGE 11 ---
127:10 C. Gao et al.
for the method being tested. For analyzing these preconditions, various testing techniques can be
considered, such as boundary value testing, equivalence partitioning testing, and random testing.
Accurately extracting or analyzing these preconditions poses a challenge, which could be addressed
by using program analysis techniques to obtain a set of constraints for the preconditions. Another
challenge is appropriately assembling these preconditions into prompts [ 169] to guide the model in
outputting test cases with high coverage. Exploring various prompt engineering techniques could
provide solutions for incorporating preconditions effectively.
Second, for large-scale projects with many dependencies, developers frequently mock the objects
to simulate the behavior of the real objects. Thus, when applying SE-specific LLMs to generate test
cases, it is challenging for the LLMs to identify the mocking objects automatically, and prefill the
data into the mocked objects to simulate the practical behavior.
Third, high-quality code is characterized not only by correct implementation logic but also by
returning correct results, appropriately modifying relevant variables, and capturing and handling
exceptions, all in alignment with the intended code design. Unit test cases use assertion statements
to verify the expected correctness of the code under test. However, providing LLMs with necessary
information to generate test cases that include effective assertion statements poses a challenge. A
promising approach is mining or deducing the design requirements of the code under test from
historical test data to establish an accurate test oracle.
Summary. For unit test generation, it faces two primary challenges: syntactical correctness
and comprehensive semantic coverage. Syntactically, the test code must be compilable and
executable. Semantically, it should cover all execution paths and accurately verify the code’s
intended functionality.
4.4 Challenges in Code Review
Code review refers to the process where developers, apart from the coders, meticulously examine
the modifications made in a code commit request. In traditional workflows, these critical code
review activities require significant human effort and call for review outcomes of exceptional
quality [100]. The rapid development of LLMs has brought new opportunities for automating code
review with some human intervention and guidance. However, due to the lack of knowledge base
of code review, which heavily relies on specific requirements and objectives, complete automation
and intelligence in code review are not yet achievable [ 145]. The challenges of LLMs in code review
applications primarily manifest in four aspects: (1) the lack of evaluation and refinement of high-
quality code review comments, (2) construction of code review applications tailored to different
types of issues, (3) gap between code review practices in industry and open source communities,
and (4) end-to-end automation of the code review process.
(1) Constructing high-quality code review data by evaluation and optimization . Compared to tasks
like code generation, existing LLMs lack optimization. It is necessary to use high-quality code
review-specific data to fine-tune LLMs, enabling them to better adapt to code review tasks. However,
the quality of code review feedback data varies in real-world projects. For example, the feedback
heavily relies on other comments (e.g., “same as above” and “refer to the previous comment”),
leading to unclear objectives and expressions [ 78]. Therefore, it is crucial to design an evaluation
method to select high-quality code review data and propose an optimization approach to refine
low-quality code review comments.
(2) Building code review applications for different types of issues . In real-world scenarios, code
changes submitted for review often involve various issues, including security vulnerabilities, coding
standard violations, and general lower-priority code formatting issues [ 175]. Existing code review
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 5, Article 127. Publication date: May 2025.

--- PDF PAGE 12 ---
The Current Challenges of SE in the Era of Large Language Models 127:11
applications based on LLMs handle all problem types as a generic code review, which causes LLMs
to primarily focus on finding more common problems, such as standard and formatting issues,
making it difficult to detect more severe problems. Furthermore, due to the nature of SFT and the
corresponding relation between a set of code changes and a single code review feedback [ 89],
building code review applications for different types of problems is a significant challenge in the
code review process.
(3) Mitigating the gap between code review practices in industry and open source communities .
Existing code review research related to LLMs primarily focuses on open source software projects.
However, there are differences between code review practices in open source communities and
industry. Specifically, developers in the industry are most concerned about security issues that
directly impact the developers and the product’s viability [ 15], and open source community projects
involve fewer security issues and more diverse formatting and documentation-related problems
[140]. Therefore, addressing key industry requirements, acquiring LLMs post-training based on
internal data, and effectively utilizing prompt engineering for inference are crucial challenges for
industry-based code review applications.
(4) End-to-end automation of the code review process. Current code review automation technologies
mainly focus on automating specific activities within the code review process. These existing
technologies are primarily based on deep learning and pre-training models [ 89, 144], requiring
fine-tuning on specific datasets for different downstream tasks and then finishing the whole code
review process by stages. In the era of LLMs, achieving full automation of the code review process
has become an exploratory challenge. For example, when a developer proposes a requirement,
the LLMs can generate problem tickets from the requirement, locate the corresponding code,
automatically generate fix solutions, and ultimately achieve end-to-end automation and intelligence
from requirement proposal to problem resolution.
Summary. The challenges in code review applications can be delineated across four aspects:
(1) There is a lack of methods to evaluating and refining real-world code review comments for
constructing high-quality code review datasets; (2) the development of specialized code review
tools is constructed to address different types of issues; (3) the gap in the purpose and process
exists between industrial practices and open source communities; (4) it lacks an end-to-end
automation pipeline within the code review process.
4.5 Challenges in Software Maintenance
In modern software maintenance, adopting LLMs can enhance modular management and data-
driven decision-making capabilities of existing approaches, thereby improving the maintenance
efficiency. However, despite their potential to handle complex systems, they still face many chal-
lenges in practical operational scenarios: (1) the complexity of service dependencies in microservice
architectures, (2) the lack of high-quality private operational data, and (3) the need for interpretabil-
ity and high reliability in operational information.
(1) Complexity of service dependencies in microservice architectures . In microservice architectures,
systems are divided into multiple independently operating service units. This design strategy greatly
enhances system modularity and scalability. However, it also leads to fragmented contextual infor-
mation and increases the complexity of dependencies between service units [ 133]. The dispersion of
information poses challenges to LLMs because they rely on continuous and consistent contextual
information for accurate decision-making and prediction. The dependencies between microservices
are complex and dynamic, further limiting a single model’s ability to capture the full scope of
cross-service operations or transactions. Therefore, to achieve effective operational management in
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 5, Article 127. Publication date: May 2025.

--- PDF PAGE 13 ---
127:12 C. Gao et al.
microservice architectures, there is an urgent need to develop innovative technologies to enhance
LLMs’ ability to integrate dispersed contextual information and improve their understanding of
complex inter-service dependencies.
(2) Lack of high-quality private operational data . In managing large-scale systems, performance
optimization is crucial, especially when handling massive data and high user volumes. However, the
insufficient quality and quantity of operational data make LLMs difficult to effectively optimize per-
formance and accurately predict potential system bottlenecks. This issue is particularly prominent
in industrial environments which involve highly proprietary data and specific system requirements
[119]. These private data, due to sensitivity and confidentiality, are usually not publicly available,
further limiting training data sources for LLMs. This confidentiality also leads to uneven data
quality, deepening the difficulty for LLMs to perform real-time monitoring and optimization in
industrial scenarios.
(3) Insufficient interpretability and reliability of the results. For ensuring the software reliability [43],
LLMs-based approaches face unique challenges. First, LLMs must avoid generating inaccurate or
false information when handling complex operations tasks, as this can lead to serious consequences.
Also, since operational decisions directly impact system performance, all results must be easy for
operation teams to understand and verify [ 139]. The opaque nature of LLMs may limit their use in
high-reliability environments.
Summary. The area of LLMs for software maintenance still faces several challenges, including the
complexity of service dependencies in microservice architectures, lack of high-quality private
operational data, and need for interpretability and reliability of the operational information.
4.6 Challenges in Vulnerability Management
The rapid development of LLMs is bringing new possibilities for building and enhancing vulner-
ability management capabilities. The major scenarios of vulnerability management applications
include perception, validation, explanation, analysis, and remediation for vulnerability scenarios
[80]. However, LLM-based vulnerability management applications are still in the preliminary
validation and exploration stage [ 47]. There are several important challenges to overcome before
achieving large-scale, efficient, and reliable applications, including (1) the lack of understanding of
vulnerability information within the LLMs; (2) the scarcity of high-quality vulnerability analysis
data; (3) the complexity of vulnerability context information, which need to extract adequate slices
as input and consider the window size of LLMs.
(1) Lack of understanding of vulnerability information . LLMs are typically trained on open source
data from various Internet sources [ 5]. However, the availability and quantity of open source data
containing vulnerability information are limited [ 51], resulting in an insufficient understanding. It
impacts the accuracy and reliability of vulnerability management applications. Therefore, native
LLMs require extensive vulnerability data to effectively develop specialized vulnerability manage-
ment, highlighting the importance of data-driven training in the construction of corresponding
applications.
(2) Scarcity of high-quality vulnerability analysis and explanation data . The strength of genera-
tive models lies in providing detailed analysis and explanations for problems. However, building
vulnerability management applications based on LLMs lacks the high-quality vulnerability expla-
nation and analysis data. It is due to that open source vulnerability information datasets mainly
provide information such as code patches, CVE IDs, and CWE types [ 16], but it is less accessible for
developers to understand and effectively address vulnerabilities. Therefore, obtaining high-quality
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 5, Article 127. Publication date: May 2025.

--- PDF PAGE 14 ---
The Current Challenges of SE in the Era of Large Language Models 127:13
vulnerability analysis and explanation data for vulnerability management applications remains an
important challenge.
(3) Complexity of vulnerability context information. It is also essential to provide sufficient vulnera-
bility context information in the prompt [162]. This context includes the code location, vulnerability
type, and detailed patch information. However, these pieces of information can be lengthy, poten-
tially exceeding the window size of existing LLMs and leading to the loss of important information.
LLMs may struggle to consider all aspects of vulnerabilities simultaneously, resulting in inaccurate
assessments of severity and impact.
Summary. Vulnerability management applications have the following challenges: First, to
better understand vulnerability information, LLMs need to be enhanced in their interpretability
by training on extensive vulnerability data. Second, high-quality vulnerability analysis data
are scarce. It is important to obtain high-quality vulnerability analysis and explanation data
for vulnerability management applications. Finally, current LLMs may not fully capture the
extensive and intricate context surrounding vulnerabilities, which need to extract adequate
slices as input while considering the limited window size.
4.7 Challenges in Data, Training, and Evaluation
In this section, we discuss the challenges related to data construction, model training, and per-
formance evaluation, which could impact the integration of LLMs into the software development
process in practice.
(1) High-quality code data . The LLMs have successfully been applied in code generation, which
attracts considerable research attention toward developing LLMs specialized in SE for downstream
tasks. Despite the rapid evolution and iteration of LLMs, their core architecture is primarily based on
the Transformer model. In this scenario, high-value data sources and high-quality pre-training data
have become key factors for enhancing LLM performance [ 77] and could become companies’ core
commercial assets. Therefore, constructing high-quality code data presents numerous challenges.
During the pre-training phase of code LLMs, the scale and diversity of data are two crucial factors
affecting model performance. Open source code communities (such as GitHub and Stack Overflow)
have become the primary data sources. However, the quality of data from these communities varies
greatly. Publicly available datasets in SE often lack rigorous quality assurance. Additionally, the
current practices for source code cleaning typically rely on heuristic text cleaning rules [ 184], which
mainly address format issues but fall short of ensuring data consistency, diversity, accuracy, and
completeness. These practices also do not effectively utilize the structural and semantic features of
code. Therefore, the challenge of creating a large-scale, diverse, and high-quality code dataset during
the pre-training phase and defining standards for high-quality code data remains unresolved.
During the fine-tuning phase for various downstream tasks, high-quality and labeled data are
essential for enhancing the performance of code LLMs. Key challenges include identifying relevant
code snippets and their contexts within extensive code datasets for effective fine-tuning, as well
as accurately labeling data while minimizing manual labor costs. Furthermore, it is critical to
refine existing datasets for downstream tasks to ensure their quality and expand these datasets
to encompass a broader range of SE tasks. Although advanced models, such as the GPT family,
offer support for data annotation [ 32], their effectiveness in generating consistent and robust code
remains challenging due to several factors. Addressing these issues is critical for improving the
utility and accuracy of code LLMs in solving different SE tasks.
(2) Exhaustive training. Training LLMs present challenges such as high costs and poor stability. The
lack of advanced engineering capabilities for training further exacerbates these issues. Companies
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 5, Article 127. Publication date: May 2025.

--- PDF PAGE 15 ---
127:14 C. Gao et al.
like Meta and OpenAI have expressed concerns about the excessive proportion of computational
resources dedicated to training debugging, which further drives up the cost of training large
models. Existing model training dashboards, such as TensorBoard [ 2], only provide basic training
features and offer limited assistance to model training personnel in debugging models. Therefore,
the training process requires advancements in deployment, configuration, bug localization, and
process monitoring.
(3) Comprehensive evaluation. Evaluating code LLMs involves two critical phases: the model-
selection phase and the post-selection phase, where they focus on optimizing research and develop-
ment efficiency in practical applications. Each phase introduces different challenges.
During the model-selection phase, evaluation typically relies on benchmark datasets. However,
existing studies indicate that the performance of LLMs on established benchmarks (e.g., HumanEval
and MBPP) has reached near-limit bottlenecks as these models evolve, making it difficult to conduct
comprehensive evaluations. Recently, evaluation datasets derived from real-world development
projects have been released [ 44], yet their creation demands considerable manual annotation and
verification effort. Challenges in this phase include setting evaluation standards, efficiently con-
structing high-quality benchmark datasets, and ensuring these datasets comprehensively represent
the scope of evaluation.
The evaluation of code LLMs in real-world usage presents distinct challenges. Benchmark-based
scores (such as hit rate, coverage rate, and edit distance) do not accurately capture the models’
practical utility to developers. Developing evaluation frameworks that mimic real development
contexts and feeding the evaluation of generated content into the model training phase to identify
training or data issues represent advanced requirements and remarkable challenges in model
evaluation.
Summary. For the training data, it needs to create a large-scale, diverse, and high-quality code
dataset to boost code LLMs’ effectiveness. Training LLMs also presents high costs and poor
stability due to the lack of advanced engineering capabilities for training debugging. Regarding
the evaluation part, it is essential to establish frameworks that replicate real-world development
settings, allowing for a thorough and precise measurement of the models’ practicality.
5 Related Work
5.1 LLM-Based Software Design
In recent works, LLMs have been used in various subtasks of requirement engineering, including
anaphoric ambiguity treatment, requirement classification, requirement terminology recognition,
coreference detection, and traceability automation.
For anaphoric ambiguity treatment, Ezzni’s empirical study [ 40] verifies that SpanBERT excels
at coreference explanation but has limited performance in ambiguity detection. Moharil and
Sharma [108] introduce a toolkit called TABASCO to detect and recognize intra- or inter-domain
ambiguity. It utilizes BERT for representation computation and clustering algorithms for analysis,
proving the effectiveness of BERT in ambiguity detection. Sridhara et al. [ 134] apply ChatGPT to
multiple SE tasks. In requirement engineering, ChatGPT successfully identifies all antecedents in
the requirements for coreference detection, preliminarily verifying the applicability of ChatGPT to
enhance the clarity of requirement expressions and eliminate ambiguity to some extent.
During project initialization, requirements often need to be categorized, such as distinguishing
security-related requirements from others. They may also be divided based on relevance to function-
ality. Moreover, specific terminologies and entities in requirements may have different meanings in
different contexts. NoRBERT [ 58] is a fine-tuned BERT that takes advantage of BERT’s strength in
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 5, Article 127. Publication date: May 2025.

--- PDF PAGE 16 ---
The Current Challenges of SE in the Era of Large Language Models 127:15
transfer learning and achieves huge improvements in identifying functional and non-functional
requirements compared to previous approaches. PRCBERT [ 103] benefits from prompt tuning,
which enhances BERT’s classification ability, outperforms NoRBERT, and demonstrates notable
capabilities in zero-shot inference on other datasets. Moharil et al. [ 107] extract terminologies and
synonyms from requirements with BERT and clustering algorithms, showcasing sample sentences
from the corpus to clarify the meanings of terminologies within specific contexts. DeepCoref [ 155]
employs fine-tuned BERT and a Word2Vec model to represent entities and predict associations
between two entities.
Furthermore, LLMs are widely adopted to solve other requirement engineering tasks, like trace-
ability automation, which establishes and maintains relationships among requirements, code, test
samples, and other elements in the software system. T-BERT [ 92] is a framework that can create
tracing links between code and natural language descriptions. Due to limited training data, tradi-
tional deep learning models often underperform pre-trained models in this task. Poudel et al. [ 122]
release Sat-BERT and DSat-BERT for requirement satisfaction assessment, providing more accurate
results than information retrieval approaches. Ronanki et al. [ 125] use ChatGPT to evaluate the
quality of user stories, which shows that the judgments from ChatGPT align well with human
evaluations. SpecGen [ 105] leverages LLMs to verify the formal specifications of programs. It
first generates specifications for a given program and employs multiple mutations to refine the
generated specifications. Xie et al. [ 168] conduct an empirical study on utilizing LLMs to generate
software specifications with few-shot learning, which evaluates the performance and costs of
15 LLM-generated specifications and emphasizes the importance of prompt design and domain
knowledge. Endres et al. [ 39] convert informal natural language descriptions into assertions with
LLMs, and verify the correctness of generated assertions, which can help identify defective code.
Zhang et al. [ 189] propose a new development practice, AISD, which first accepts user requests and
then generates detailed applicable scenarios and prototype system designs before proceeding to
generate the system implementation.
5.2 LLM-Based Code Assistance and Generation
Code generation can be applied to various scenarios, including code completion, code search,
bug fixing, code review, and automatic testing. These applications aim to enhance development
efficiency, reduce human errors, and assist developers in implementing new features rapidly. In
recent years, code LLMs have been widely applied to code generation tasks. These models adopt
different architectures, including CodeBERT [ 45], PLBART [ 4], and CodeGPT [ 101]. They are
pre-trained on code corpora to gain a deep understanding of code syntax, semantics, and common
structures. To boost their understanding of code complexity, some innovative methods integrate
structural representation. GraphCodeBERT [ 53] incorporates graph-based representation on top of
CodeBERT, while CodeT5 [156] combines the Encoder-Decoder paradigm with code structure. These
enhancements aim to provide more fine-grained understandings of code relations and dependencies
for the model in addition to syntax information.
Open source communities have provided abundant resources for code generation research, such
as open source repositories, datasets, and tools. For instance, GitHub, Stack Overflow, and other
platforms offer plenty of code samples, which are used to train and evaluate LLMs. CodeX [1]
and CodeGen [ 114] are constructed with billions of parameters, demonstrating state-of-the-art
performance on code generation tasks, capable of assisting the developers to generate code and
improve programming efficiency. The success of CodeX prompts the development of similar models
like StarCoder [86] and CodeLLaMA [127]. Developers can also use ChatGPT and GPT-4 to generate
code, which has been proven effective in such fields.
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 5, Article 127. Publication date: May 2025.

--- PDF PAGE 17 ---
127:16 C. Gao et al.
However, instead of developing new LLMs, existing studies usually exploit LLMs as black-
box tools. They integrate many techniques of in-context learning (ICL), multi-agent systems,
integrating traditional methods, user interaction, and CoT reasoning to improve the effectiveness
of LLMs in solving different tasks.
Jiang et al. [ 72] propose a two-stage code generation pipeline based on ICL, i.e., planning and
implementation. This pipeline allows LLMs to plan the solution steps according to users’ intent
before generating code. Li et al. [ 84] propose a new framework, AceCoder, which retrieves similar
code as cases so that LLMs can learn algorithms and API knowledge. It then instructs LLMs to
generate test cases and APIs to ensure that they understand the requirements before generating
the code. LAIL [ 83] trains an auxiliary retriever to fetch examples for ICL, which first estimates the
probability of generating the sample programs given the requirements and inputs with LLMs, then
labels samples as positive or negative. It initiates contrastive learning for the retriever to learn LLM
preferences, so it can select the optimal examples for ICL. On the other hand, as inserting print
statements is effective for debugging, Hu et al. [ 61] utilize this debugging approach and instruct
LLMs to insert print statements with ICL, execute the code locally, and ask LLMs to refine the code
based on the outputs.
Multi-agent systems play different roles in accomplishing tasks collaboratively. These roles
often mimic real-world development processes. Dong et al. [ 36] point out that code generation
research should not be confined to programming alone, and suggest adopting multiple LLM agents
to simulate different development team roles, such as analysts who break down user requirements,
developers who generate or update code, and testers who test the code from various aspects.
AgentCoder [ 64] adopts three agents, including a developer, a test designer, and a tester. The
developer agent generates and refines the code based on tester feedback, the test designer agent
generates test cases given the code, and the tester agent executes the test and offers feedback.
LCG [91] simulates real-world development processes with multiple agents, including requirement
engineers, architects, developers, and testers, and improves the development performance of
GPT-3.5 with CoT and prompt engineering techniques. Similarly, MapCoder [ 68] employs four
agents, each responsible for collecting relevant cases, planning, generating code, and debugging,
respectively.
As LLM struggles with repository-level code generation, some researchers combine traditional
tools to bridge the gap. CodePlan [ 13] studies repository-level code generation, constructing
planning graphs based on dependency analysis and adaptive planning, with edit positions as
nodes and edit orders as edges. Information from these graphs is integrated into the prompts
used to generate code. The code is then merged into the repository, causing an update to the
planning graphs as the process continues iteratively. ToolGen [ 151] integrates auto-completion
tools to resolve the dependency issues in repository-level code generation. It first enhances the
code in the repository with special tokens for LLM fine-tuning alongside documentation. Dur-
ing token sequence generation, the auto-completion tool produces the correct completion entry
when the LLM generates a particular token. Zhang et al. [ 187] release ToolCoder, which fine-
tunes LLMs using a ChatGPT-augmented dataset with tool-use information. During inference,
an API search tool is integrated to offer suggestions on API selection. Zhang et al. [ 186] propose
CodeAgent, integrating five tools for tasks like information retrieval and code symbol naviga-
tion, as well as four agent strategies like OpenAI’s function calling, to help LLMs generate code.
However, not all studies report state-of-the-art performance for LLMs. For example, Bochenek
[18] tries to use ChatGPT to complete Java code templates. In conclusion, the author claims that
the results are neither predictable nor reproducible, and traditional template-filling approaches
perform better.
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 5, Article 127. Publication date: May 2025.

--- PDF PAGE 18 ---
The Current Challenges of SE in the Era of Large Language Models 127:17
Some studies investigate the interactions between users and LLMs. Fakhoury et al. [ 41] propose
a novel framework, TiCoder, to ensure the correctness of generated code. It first generates code
and test cases with LLMs, tests the code locally, asks LLMs to select the best test cases based on the
test results, and finally requests the users to evaluate the correctness of the code, test cases, and
test results. Unsatisfactory test cases are then pruned, and the framework updates the code and test
cases iteratively. Considering the lack of domain knowledge, Yan et al. [ 172] propose IntelliExplain,
which requires LLMs to explain the users’ intent in detail in natural language and avoid code
generation until the user agrees with the LLMs’ explanation.
To mitigate misalignment between code and specifications in previous CoT methods, Tian
et al. [ 142] design a test case-driven CoT approach named TCoT, which lets LLMs understand
specifications through test cases before generating the code. Sun et al. [ 137] propose CodePlan,
which uses multi-task learning to distill the ability of code generation and planning from larger
LLMs to smaller ones.
Other studies examine code generation from perspectives beyond the correctness of the code.
Nguyen et al. [111] construct GPTSniffer with CodeBERT, which helps to identify whether the code
is generated by AI tools like ChatGPT. Huang et al. [ 63] investigate whether LLM-generated code
contains biases related to age, race, and gender. It uses GPT-4 to detect biases and utilizes few-shot
learning to reduce them. Niu evaluates the efficiency of generated code on existing datasets and
explores how prompt strategies affect code efficiency.
5.3 LLM-Based Software Testing
In software testing, LLMs are typically used to generate test cases for automatic testing, construct
assertions, produce test inputs, analyze defects, and help debug and fix the code. For example, LLMs
can generate expected test cases by understanding code contexts and structures [ 171], to improve
test coverage and effectiveness. Furthermore, LLMs can generate accurate assertions [ 104, 178] as
part of test cases, to validate whether the behavior of the software meets the expectations. On the
level of system testing, LLMs can generate various test inputs, which is essential for testing user
interfaces and functionalities of mobile applications.
Recently, various approaches aim at generating unit tests with LLMs, which is often associated
with pre-training or fine-tuning. Alagarsamy et al. [ 8] propose A3Test, a framework inspired by
domain adaptation, which transfers assertion generation knowledge into test code generation. They
pre-train LLMs with methods to be tested and assertion statements, equipping LLMs with more
knowledge about assertions. The pre-trained models are then fine-tuned for test code generation,
allowing them to better understand the relationship between the methods to be tested and their
corresponding test code. Similarly, Hashtroudi et al. [ 57] pre-train LLMs with existing developer-
written test code, helping models adapt to the new project domains and generate human-readable
unit tests. Rao et al. [ 123] introduce CAT-LM, which uses a novel pre-train signal to map code to
test files and train a 270M GPT-style language model. Steenhoek et al. [ 135] release RLSQM, which
scores programs based on static analysis and embeds the quality information into LLMs, including
factors such as the presence of assertion statements, whether the methods to be tested are invoked,
and the existence of method signatures.
With the development of LLMs, they can exhibit satisfying performance without further pre-
training or fine-tuning. Therefore, many recent researches instead focus on prompt strategies to
improve LLMs’ ability to handle context and details. Xie et al. [ 169] propose ChatUniTest, adopting
a generate-verify-repair framework, which analyzes project information and extracts key data to
create a context embedded with methods to be tested as well as their dependencies. After the LLMs
receive the prompt and generate feedback, ChatUniTest extracts test code from the outputs, verifies
the code, and fixes compilation errors with either rule-based or LLM-based approaches. Other
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 5, Article 127. Publication date: May 2025.

--- PDF PAGE 19 ---
127:18 C. Gao et al.
works generate unit tests with additional documentation. Plein et al. [ 120] suggest generating test
code that can reflect real-world, complex usage scenarios, which exposes faulty program behavior.
As such scenarios are often described informally in defect reports, they consider such reports as
valid inputs to generate fault-triggering test code, unlike previous works focusing on generating
random test inputs.
Researchers also develop many novel methods to generate test inputs or test oracles with LLMs.
These inputs validate mobile apps, Web applications, and deep learning frameworks. To automate
the process of mobile app testing, researchers propose different test input generation approaches
with LLMs. Yoon et al. [177] propose DROIDAGENT, which sets goals with LLMs given the Android
app and achieves the goals by interacting with the apps. The evaluation of DROIDAGENT shows
that it can engage in deeper interaction with apps to cover more features. Liu et al. [ 96] propose
QTypist, which uses LLMs to generate input text for mobile app GUIs, solving the challenge
of generating varied and semantically correct GUI inputs. The evaluation shows that QTypist
successfully improves the test pass rate and covers more app activities and pages. Liu et al. [ 97]
proposed InputBlaster to generate abnormal text inputs for mobile apps with LLMs. It creates
multiple test generators, each capable of generating abnormal inputs based on LLM-generated
mutation rules.
In Web test automation, Kim et al. [ 76] propose RESTGPT, generating test inputs for REST
API with LLMs, which overcomes the limitations of previous methods. It struggles to extract
rule types from unstructured natural language and improves accuracy. Another issue with LLM-
generated programs is the failure to cover corner cases. To solve this issue, Deng et al. [ 31]
release FuzzGPT, which pre-processes LLMs and synthesizes fault-triggering test inputs for fuzzing.
FuzzGPT automatically extracts historical knowledge of fault-triggering programs with LLM
capabilities. Evaluation results prove FuzzGPT’s effectiveness in fuzzing and detecting more errors.
In other domains, researchers also propose innovative methods for LLM-based test input gen-
eration. For example, Baudry et al. [ 14] highlight the ability of LLMs to generate pseudo-test
data and successfully generate data aligning well with cultural contexts and suitable for testing,
as well as code compatible with test input generation tools. Xia et al. [ 167] propose Fuzz4All, a
generic fuzzing tool using LLMs as an engine to generate and mutate test inputs. Fuzz4All supports
multiple programming languages and scenarios, such as C/C++ compilers, solvers, tools in Go, Java
compilers, and quantum computation platforms.
Test oracles can validate the correctness of test results. In traditional approaches, test oracles are
usually derived from specifications. However, manual generation is labor-intensive, while automatic
generation proves to be extremely challenging. In recent years, researchers have started to use LLMs
to help generate test oracles. Metamorphic testing (MT) has emerged as a successful solution to
automated testing and test oracle generation. MT relies on metamorphic relations (MRs), which
describe the relationship between test inputs and outputs. Shin et al. [ 131] utilize LLMs to infer
executable MRs (EMRs) from requirements, guiding them to understand software specifications
and DSLs for EMRs to generate the test oracle. Zhang et al. [ 190] explore applying ChatGPT to
generate MRs automatically and evaluate their quality for auto-driving systems, demonstrating the
effectiveness of the proposed approach, which significantly reduces manual effort in MR generation.
Tsigkanos et al. [ 143] design an LLM-based process to extract variables from user manuals of sci-
entific software, achieving an accuracy of 0.87 and successfully extracting 61.8% partially matching
variables as well as 34.7% exact-matching variables. Hyun et al. [ 67] introduce METAL, promoting
systematic evaluation of LLM quality with MT. METAL can automatically generate hundreds of
MRs from templates covering various qualitative properties and tasks. Furthermore, they intro-
duce new metrics, which combine attack success rate and semantic quality, to better evaluate the
effect of MT.
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 5, Article 127. Publication date: May 2025.

--- PDF PAGE 20 ---
The Current Challenges of SE in the Era of Large Language Models 127:19
5.4 LLM-Based Code Review
The applications of LLMs in code analysis and review are a trending topic in the current field of
artificial intelligence. These models utilize deep learning techniques to learn a large amount of code
data so that they can understand and generate programs with complicated structures. These LLMs
play an important role in software development.
In code analysis, researchers have developed multiple models to understand code diffs and
reviews. Universal models like GPT-3 display outstanding performance in several natural language
processing tasks, but on the other hand, might be less accurate in code analysis compared to
specialized models. Specialized models, such as CodeBERT and GraphCodeBERT, are specifically
built on understanding code semantics, pre-trained on large code corpora, and can better capture
code syntax and semantics.
In code review, LLMs are mainly applied to review code and detect flaws automatically. For
instance, DeepCode [ 75] is a code review tool powered by machine learning, which can detect
security vulnerabilities and performance issues to help developers enhance the quality of code.
CodeReviewer [89] is a pre-trained model tailored specifically for the code review scenario, which
is trained on a large-scale dataset of real-world code changes and code reviews from open source
projects, helping to better understand code diffs and reviews. Tufano et al. [ 146, 147] approach
code review from the perspectives of both the developer and the reviewer, and train T5 for two
subtasks of code review. The first subtask requires the model to refine the given code, while the
second requires the model to edit the code based on a review comment. AUGER [ 85] is a framework
utilizing the pre-trained model CodeTrans, a variant of T5. It labels lines of code relevant to the
review comment, performs cross-pre-training between functions and comments, and fine-tunes for
comment generation. AutoTransform [141] addresses new tokens with Byte Pair Encoding and
adopts Transformer in a machine translation manner to edit the code after review. Zhou et al. [ 193]
study previous generative code review methods and conclude that: (1) They are based on different
datasets, making comparisons difficult; (2) There are few studies targeting CodeT5; (3) Exact match
is often the primary metric, while other metrics are overlooked. To address these issues, they adopt
CodeT5, introduce a new metric called edit process, and compare their approach with previous
works.
LLaMA-Reviewer [100] uses LLaMA in code review, utilizing parameter-efficient fine-tuning to
reduce resource consumption while maintaining high performance. As a result, even the smallest
LLaMA-6.7B performs comparably to previous methods. Wen et al. [ 160] use GPT-3.5 for code
analysis and review. They first extract relevant code with static tools, bug reports, and program
dependencies, before constructing formal prompts that incorporate domain knowledge and repre-
sentative examples, and prompting the LLM to evaluate the accuracy of warnings from static tools,
greatly reducing false positives. Pornprasit et al. [ 121] also use GPT-3.5 for code review, investigat-
ing the performance impact of few-shot learning, role specification, and model fine-tuning, and
compare the results with previous approaches. Tufano et al. [ 145] study whether current methods
are sufficient for comment generation and comment-based code editing, examining the types of
samples where these methods succeed or fail and comparing them with ChatGPT.
5.5 LLM-Based Software Maintenance
As software systems grow larger, the maintenance becomes more complex and critical. The intro-
duction of LLMs brings new opportunities to software maintenance, such as failure identification
[66, 73, 81, 106], root cause analysis [ 6, 26, 74, 157, 182], and postmortem analysis [ 35, 48, 65].
For failure identification, researchers use LLMs for log parsing and anomaly detection, addressing
challenges in semantic understanding and efficiency. For example, Huo et al. [ 66] first consider
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 5, Article 127. Publication date: May 2025.

--- PDF PAGE 21 ---
127:20 C. Gao et al.
semantic information in log parsing. Le et al. [ 81] try to use ChatGPT for log parsing and initially
confirm the ability of LLMs in this area. However, LLMs have issues such as long response times
and high computational costs when processing a large number of logs. To address this, Jiang et al.
[73] propose an adaptive caching mechanism that caches log templates to avoid repeated requests
and improve parsing efficiency. Ma et al. [106] combine external knowledge to enhance log analysis.
For root cause analysis, LLMs help understand system events and diagnose faults by combining
code and log data for automatic analysis and recommendations. Ahmed et al. [ 6] use LLMs to
automatically output fault root causes and suggest mitigation measures. Wang et al. [ 157] propose
a tool-learning method. Zhang et al. [ 182] introduce a confidence evaluation framework to alleviate
issues like model hallucination. Jin et al. [ 74] use LLMs for fault impact assessment and summary
generation. Chen et al. [ 26] develop RCACopilot to achieve an end-to-end fault handling process.
For postmortem analysis, LLMs assist in summarizing incident tickets, improving data labeling
efficiency, and promoting fault prediction. Dogga et al. [ 35] propose fault classification rules and
attempt automatic classification. Ganatra et al. [ 48] apply LLMs to the fault analysis pipeline.
The Huawei Cloud team [ 65] proposes a hierarchical representation method to achieve automatic
classification and prediction.
Overall, the application of LLMs in software maintenance improves efficiency, simplifies complex
tasks, and reduces the time for repairing. However, it also brings challenges like complexity of
service dependencies and model interpretability that need to be addressed.
5.6 LLM-Based Vulnerability Management
Recently, many studies have proposed to manage vulnerabilities, including vulnerability detection
[163, 164, 165, 185], vulnerability assessment [ 116], and vulnerability awareness [ 117, 192].
Vulnerability detection aims to detect vulnerabilities in the source code [ 161, 165]. Automated
code vulnerability detection by using LLMs has gained increasing attention in recent years [ 60,
99]. EPVD [ 185] proposes an execution path selection algorithm and adopts a pre-trained model to
learn the path representations. SVulD [ 112] constructs contrastive paired instances and uses the
pre-trained model to learn distinguishing semantic representations.
To improve early sensing of vulnerabilities, many studies are proposed to make aware of vul-
nerabilities from issue reports [ 117] or silent fixes [ 192]. Open source software usually adopts a
vulnerability disclosure policy which causes the majority of vulnerabilities to be fixed silently.
Identifying silent fixes and their corresponding explanations is essential to sense vulnerabilities.
Zhou et al. [ 192] propose an approach named ColeFunda, consisting of a Contrastive Learner and
FunDa, a novel approach for Function change Data augmentation. ColeFunda integrates contrastive
learning and BERT models to improve its effectiveness in identifying different vulnerabilities. To
sense vulnerabilities early, Pan et al. [ 117] augment the BERT model with a memory component,
which stores the external vulnerability knowledge from CWEs.
6 Threats to Validity
One threat is the completeness of the challenges. The summarized challenges are based on the
discussion among 24 participants, which might not cover all the current challenges of LLM4SE. In
this article, to ensure the integrity of the challenges, the discussion was designed to encompass all
the processes in SDLC and included six thematic sessions. Each session lasted for around 4 hours
to ensure that the discussion was as thorough as possible.
Another threat is related to the representativeness of the participants. Our solution is increasing
diversity, e.g., 17 academic researchers and 7 industry practitioners. We believe we have made this
threat have minimal impact on the results of our investigation.
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 5, Article 127. Publication date: May 2025.

--- PDF PAGE 22 ---
The Current Challenges of SE in the Era of Large Language Models 127:21
7 Conclusions
LLMs are bringing significant changes to the SE field and are applied to various SE tasks, such as code
generation, code review, and vulnerability management. However, a comprehensive understanding
of the challenges of LLMs on SE is still in the early stages. This article highlights the challenges
and opportunities in LLM4SE. We present seven challenges summarized in the “9th CCF Beautiful
Lake Seminars. ” These challenges include various aspects of the SDLC, e.g., requirements, coding,
testing, and code review. This article also highlights challenges in building LLMs, including data
preparation, training, and evaluation. We provide a research roadmap of LLM4SE and outline
promising future research directions.
References
[1] The 9th CCF Beautiful Lake Seminars. 2024. Retrieved from https://www.ccf.org.cn/xhhy/2024-03-15/816185.shtml
[2] TensorBoard. 2024. Retrieved from https://www.tensorflow.org/tensorboard
[3] Jean-François Abramatic, Roberto Di Cosmo, and Stefano Zacchiroli. 2018. Building the universal archive of source
code. Communications of the ACM 61, 10 (2018), 29–31.
[4] Wasi Uddin Ahmad, Saikat Chakraborty, Baishakhi Ray, and Kai-Wei Chang. 2021. Unified pre-training for program
understanding and generation. In 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (NAACL-HLT ’21) . Association for Computational Linguistics, 2655–2668.
[5] Toufique Ahmed, Christian Bird, Premkumar T. Devanbu, and Saikat Chakraborty. 2024. Studying LLM performance
on closed- and open-source data. arXiv:2402.15100. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.15100
[6] Toufique Ahmed, Supriyo Ghosh, Chetan Bansal, Thomas Zimmermann, Xuchao Zhang, and Saravan Rajmohan.
2023. Recommending root-cause and mitigation steps for cloud incidents using large language models. In 45th
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE ’23) . IEEE, 1737–1749.
[7] Muhammad Azeem Akbar, Arif Ali Khan, Najmul Islam, and Sajjad Mahmood. 2024. DevOps project management
success factors: A decision-making framework. Software: Practice and Experience 54, 2 (2024), 257–280.
[8] Saranya Alagarsamy, Chakkrit Tantithamthavorn, and Aldeida Aleti. 2024. A3test: Assertion-augmented automated
test case generation. Information and Software Technology 176 (2024), 107565.
[9] Loubna Ben Allal, Raymond Li, Denis Kocetkov, Chenghao Mou, Christopher Akiki, Carlos Muñoz Ferrandis,
Niklas Muennighoff, Mayank Mishra, Alex Gu, Manan Dey, et al. 2023. SantaCoder: Don’t reach for the stars!
arXiv:2301.03988. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.03988
[10] Sathurshan Arulmohan, Marie-Jean Meurs, and Sébastien Mosser. 2023. Extracting domain models from textual
requirements in the era of large language models. In ACM/IEEE International Conference on Model Driven Engineering
Languages and Systems (MODELS ’23 Companion) . IEEE, 580–587.
[11] Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David Dohan, Ellen Jiang,
Carrie Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc Le, et al. 2021. Program synthesis with large language models. arXiv:2108.07732.
Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.07732
[12] Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, Yunfei Chu, Zeyu Cui, Kai Dang, Xiaodong Deng, Yang Fan, Wenbin Ge, Yu Han, Fei Huang, et
al. 2023. Qwen Technical Report. arXiv:2309.16609. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.16609
[13] Ramakrishna Bairi, Atharv Sonwane, Aditya Kanade, Arun Iyer, Suresh Parthasarathy, Sriram Rajamani, B. Ashok,
and Shashank Shet. 2024. CodePlan: Repository-level coding using LLMs and planning. Proceedings of the ACM on
Software Engineering 1, FSE (2024), 675–698.
[14] Benoit Baudry, Khashayar Etemadi, Sen Fang, Yogya Gamage, Yi Liu, Yuxin Liu, Martin Monperrus, Javier Ron,
André Silva, and Deepika Tiwari. 2024. Generative AI to generate test data generators. arXiv:2401.17626. Retrieved
from https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.17626
[15] Tobias Baum, Olga Liskin, Kai Niklas, and Kurt Schneider. 2016. Factors influencing code review processes in industry.
In Fast Software Encryption Conference. ACM, 85–96.
[16] Guru Prasad Bhandari, Amara Naseer, and Leon Moonen. 2021. CVEfixes: Automated collection of vulnerabilities
and their fixes from open-source software. In 17th International Conference on Predictive Models and Data Analytics
in Software Engineering (PROMISE ’21) . Shane McIntosh, Xin Xia, and Sousuke Amasaki (Eds.), ACM, 30–39.
[17] Kelly Blincoe, Giuseppe Valetto, and Daniela E. Damian. 2013. Do all task dependencies require coordination? The
role of task properties in identifying critical coordination needs in software projects. In Joint Meeting of the European
Software Engineering Conference and the ACM SIGSOFT Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering
(ESEC/FSE ’13). ACM, 213–223.
[18] Adam Bochenek. 2023. Can ChatGPT replace a template-based code generator? In FedCSIS (Communication Papers) ,
43–50.
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 5, Article 127. Publication date: May 2025.

--- PDF PAGE 23 ---
127:22 C. Gao et al.
[19] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D. Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan,
Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. 2020. Language models are few-shot learners. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems , 1877–1901.
[20] Saheed A. Busari and Emmanuel Letier. 2017. RADAR: A lightweight tool for requirements and architecture decision
analysis. In 39th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE ’17) . IEEE/ACM, 552–562.
[21] Javier Cámara, Javier Troya, Lola Burgueño, and Antonio Vallecillo. 2023. On the assessment of generative AI in
modeling tasks: An experience report with ChatGPT and UML. Software and Systems Modeling 22, 3 (2023), 781–793.
[22] Yihan Cao, Siyu Li, Yixin Liu, Zhiling Yan, Yutong Dai, Philip S. Yu, and Lichao Sun. 2023. A comprehensive survey
of AI-generated content (AIGC): A history of generative AI from GAN to ChatGPT. arXiv:2303.04226. Retrieved
from https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.04226
[23] Mikaël Chelli, Jules Descamps, Vincent Lavoué, Christophe Trojani, Michel Azar, Marcel Deckert, Jean-Luc Raynier,
Gilles Clowez, Pascal Boileau, and Caroline Ruetsch-Chelli. 2024. Hallucination rates and reference accuracy of
ChatGPT and Bard for systematic reviews: Comparative analysis. Journal of Medical Internet Research 26 (2024),
e53164.
[24] Kua Chen, Yujing Yang, Boqi Chen, José Antonio Hernández López, Gunter Mussbacher, and Dániel Varró. 2023.
Automated domain modeling with large language models: A comparative study. In 26th ACM/IEEE International
Conference on Model Driven Engineering Languages and Systems (MODELS ’23) . IEEE, 162–172.
[25] Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri
Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. 2021. Evaluating large language models trained on
code. arXiv:2107.03374. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.03374
[26] Yinfang Chen, Huaibing Xie, Minghua Ma, Yu Kang, Xin Gao, Liu Shi, Yunjie Cao, Xuedong Gao, Hao Fan, Ming
Wen, et al. 2024. Automatic root cause analysis via large language models for cloud incidents. In 19th European
Conference on Computer Systems (EuroSys ’24) . ACM, 674–688.
[27] Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam Roberts, Paul Barham,
Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. 2023. PaLM: Scaling language modeling with
pathways. Journal of Machine Learning Research 24 (2023), 240:1–240:113.
[28] Fenia Christopoulou, Gerasimos Lampouras, Milan Gritta, Guchun Zhang, Yinpeng Guo, Zhongqi Li, Qi Zhang,
Meng Xiao, Bo Shen, Lin Li, et al. 2022. PanGu-Coder: Program synthesis with function-level language modeling.
arXiv:2207.11280. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.11280
[29] Copilot. 2024. Retrieved from https://copilot.microsoft.com/
[30] DeepSeek-AI, Qihao Zhu, Daya Guo, Zhihong Shao, Dejian Yang, Peiyi Wang, Runxin Xu, Y. Wu, Yukun Li,
Huazuo Gao, et al. 2024. DeepSeek-Coder-V2: Breaking the barrier of closed-source models in code intelligence.
arXiv:2406.11931. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/2406.11931
[31] Yinlin Deng, Chunqiu Steven Xia, Chenyuan Yang, Shizhuo Dylan Zhang, Shujing Yang, and Lingming Zhang.
2023. Large language models are edge-case fuzzers: Testing deep learning libraries via FuzzGPT. arXiv:2304.02014.
Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.02014
[32] Bosheng Ding, Chengwei Qin, Linlin Liu, Yew Ken Chia, Shafiq Joty, Boyang Li, and Lidong Bing. 2022. Is gpt-3 a
good data annotator? arXiv:2212.10450. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.10450
[33] Yangruibo Ding, Jinjun Peng, Marcus J. Min, Gail E. Kaiser, Junfeng Yang, and Baishakhi Ray. 2024. SemCoder:
Training code language models with comprehensive semantics. arXiv:2406.01006. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/
abs/2406.01006
[34] Yangruibo Ding, Zijian Wang, Wasi Ahmad, Hantian Ding, Ming Tan, Nihal Jain, Murali Krishna Ramanathan,
Ramesh Nallapati, Parminder Bhatia, Dan Roth, et al. 2024. Crosscodeeval: A diverse and multilingual benchmark
for cross-file code completion. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems .
[35] Pradeep Dogga, Chetan Bansal, Richard Costleigh, Gopinath Jayagopal, Suman Nath, and Xuchao Zhang. 2023.
AutoARTS: Taxonomy, insights and tools for root cause labelling of incidents in Microsoft Azure. In 2023 USENIX
Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC ’23). Julia Lawall and Dan Williams (Eds.), USENIX Association, 359–372.
[36] Yihong Dong, Xue Jiang, Zhi Jin, and Ge Li. 2023. Self-collaboration code generation via ChatGPT. arXiv:2304.07590.
Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.07590
[37] GitLab Duo. 2024. Retrieved from https://about.gitlab.com/gitlab-duo/
[38] Andrew Edwards-Jones. 2014. Qualitative data analysis with NVIVO. Journal of Education for Teaching: International
Research and Pedagogy 40, 2 (2014), 193–195.
[39] Madeline Endres, Sarah Fakhoury, Saikat Chakraborty, and Shuvendu K. Lahiri. 2023. Formalizing natu-
ral language intent into program specifications via large language models. arXiv:2310.01831. Retrieved from
https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.01831
[40] Saad Ezzini, Sallam Abualhaija, Chetan Arora, and Mehrdad Sabetzadeh. 2022. Automated handling of anaphoric
ambiguity in requirements: A multi-solution study. In 44th International Conference on Software Engineering ,
187–199.
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 5, Article 127. Publication date: May 2025.

--- PDF PAGE 24 ---
The Current Challenges of SE in the Era of Large Language Models 127:23
[41] Sarah Fakhoury, Aaditya Naik, Georgios Sakkas, Saikat Chakraborty, and Shuvendu K. Lahiri. 2024. LLM-based
test-driven interactive code generation: User study and empirical evaluation. arXiv:2404.10100. Retrieved from
https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.10100
[42] Angela Fan, Beliz Gokkaya, Mark Harman, Mitya Lyubarskiy, Shubho Sengupta, Shin Yoo, and Jie M. Zhang. 2023.
Large language models for software engineering: Survey and open problems. In IEEE/ACM International Conference
on Software Engineering: Future of Software Engineering (ICSE-FoSE ’23) . IEEE, 31–53.
[43] Joao Faustino, Daniel Adriano, Ricardo Amaro, Rubén Pereira, and Miguel Mira da Silva. 2022. DevOps benefits: A
systematic literature review. Software: Practice and Experience 52, 9 (2022), 1905–1926.
[44] Jia Feng, Jiachen Liu, Cuiyun Gao, Chun Yong Chong, Chaozheng Wang, Shan Gao, and Xin Xia. 2024. Complex-
CodeEval: A benchmark for evaluating large code models on more complex code. arXiv:2409.10280. Retrieved from
https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.10280
[45] Zhangyin Feng, Daya Guo, Duyu Tang, Nan Duan, Xiaocheng Feng, Ming Gong, Linjun Shou, Bing Qin, Ting Liu,
Daxin Jiang, et al. 2020. CodeBERT: A pre-trained model for programming and natural languages. In Findings of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (EMNLP ’20) . Association for Computational Linguistics, 1536–1547.
[46] Daniel Fried, Armen Aghajanyan, Jessy Lin, Sida Wang, Eric Wallace, Freda Shi, Ruiqi Zhong, Scott Yih, Luke
Zettlemoyer, and Mike Lewis. 2023. InCoder: A generative model for code infilling and synthesis. In the 11th
International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR ’23) . OpenReview.net.
[47] Michael Fu, Chakkrit Kla Tantithamthavorn, Van Nguyen, and Trung Le. 2023. ChatGPT for vulnerability detection,
classification, and repair: How far are we? In 30th Asia-Pacific Software Engineering Conference (APSEC ’23). IEEE,
632–636.
[48] Vaibhav Ganatra, Anjaly Parayil, Supriyo Ghosh, Yu Kang, Minghua Ma, Chetan Bansal, Suman Nath, and Jonathan
Mace. 2023. Detection is better than cure: A cloud incidents perspective. In 31st ACM Joint European Software
Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE ’23) . ACM, 1891–1902.
[49] Shuzheng Gao, Xin-Cheng Wen, Cuiyun Gao, Wenxuan Wang, Hongyu Zhang, and Michael R. Lyu. 2023. What
makes good in-context demonstrations for code intelligence tasks with LLMs? In 38th IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE ’23) . IEEE, 761–773.
[50] Gartner. 2023. Retrieved from https://www.gartner.com/en/articles/gartner-top-10-strategic-technology-trends-for-
2023
[51] Hamza Ghani, Jesus Luna, Abdelmajid Khelil, Najib Alkadri, and Neeraj Suri. 2013. Predictive vulnerability scoring
in the context of insufficient information availability. In 2013 International Conference on Risks and Security of Internet
and Systems (CRiSIS). Bruno Crispo, Ravi S. Sandhu, Nora Cuppens-Boulahia, Mauro Conti, and Jean-Louis Lanet
(Eds.), IEEE Computer Society, 1–8.
[52] Suriya Gunasekar, Yi Zhang, Jyoti Aneja, Caio César Teodoro Mendes, Allie Del Giorno, Sivakanth Gopi, Mojan
Javaheripi, Piero Kauffmann, Gustavo de Rosa, Olli Saarikivi, et al. 2023. Textbooks are all you need. arXiv:2306.11644.
Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.11644
[53] Daya Guo, Shuo Ren, Shuai Lu, Zhangyin Feng, Duyu Tang, Shujie Liu, Long Zhou, Nan Duan, Alexey Svyatkovskiy,
Shengyu Fu, et al. 2021. GraphCodeBERT: Pre-training code representations with data flow. In 9th International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR ’21) . OpenReview.net.
[54] Daya Guo, Qihao Zhu, Dejian Yang, Zhenda Xie, Kai Dong, Wentao Zhang, Guanting Chen, Xiao Bi, Y. Wu, Y. K. Li,
et al. 2024. DeepSeek-Coder: When the large language model meets programming - The rise of code intelligence.
arXiv:2401.14196. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.14196
[55] Yiyang Hao, Ge Li, Yongqiang Liu, Xiaowei Miao, He Zong, Siyuan Jiang, Yang Liu, and He Wei. 2022. AixBench: A
code generation benchmark dataset. arXiv:2206.13179. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.13179
[56] Mark Harman. 2012. The role of artificial intelligence in software engineering. In 1st International Workshop on
Realizing AI Synergies in Software Engineering (RAISE ’12) . IEEE, 1–6.
[57] Sepehr Hashtroudi, Jiho Shin, Hadi Hemmati, and Song Wang. 2023. Automated test case generation using code
models and domain adaptation. arXiv:2308.08033. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.08033
[58] Tobias Hey, Jan Keim, Anne Koziolek, and Walter F. Tichy. 2020. Norbert: Transfer learning for requirements
classification. In 2020 IEEE 28th International Requirements Engineering Conference (RE). IEEE, 169–179.
[59] John E. Hopcroft, Jeffrey D. Ullman, and Alfred Vaino Aho. 1983. Data Structures and Algorithms . Addison-Wesley,
Boston, MA.
[60] Sihao Hu, Tiansheng Huang, Fatih Ilhan, Selim Furkan Tekin, and Ling Liu. 2023. Large language model-powered
smart contract vulnerability detection: New perspectives. In 5th IEEE International Conference on Trust, Privacy and
Security in Intelligent Systems and Applications (TPS-ISA ’23) . IEEE, 297–306.
[61] Xueyu Hu, Kun Kuang, Jiankai Sun, Hongxia Yang, and Fei Wu. 2024. Leveraging print debugging to improve code
generation in large language models. arXiv:2401.05319. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.05319
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 5, Article 127. Publication date: May 2025.

--- PDF PAGE 25 ---
127:24 C. Gao et al.
[62] Xing Hu, Xin Xia, David Lo, Zhiyuan Wan, Qiuyuan Chen, and Thomas Zimmermann. 2022. Practitioners’ ex-
pectations on automated code comment generation. In 44th IEEE/ACM 44th International Conference on Software
Engineering (ICSE ’22) . ACM, 1693–1705.
[63] Dong Huang, Qingwen Bu, Jie Zhang, Xiaofei Xie, Junjie Chen, and Heming Cui. 2023. Bias assessment and mitigation
in LLM-based code generation. arXiv:2309.14345. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.14345
[64] Dong Huang, Qingwen Bu, Jie M. Zhang, Michael Luck, and Heming Cui. 2023. AgentCoder: Multi-agent-based code
generation with iterative testing and optimisation. arXiv:2312.13010. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.13010
[65] Junjie Huang, Jinyang Liu, Zhuangbin Chen, Zhihan Jiang, Yichen Li, Jiazhen Gu, Cong Feng, Zengyin Yang,
Yongqiang Yang, and Michael R. Lyu. 2024. FaultProfIT: Hierarchical fault profiling of incident tickets in large-scale
cloud systems. In 46th International Conference on Software Engineering: Software Engineering in Practice (ICSE-SEIP
’24). ACM, 392–404.
[66] Yintong Huo, Cheryl Lee, Yuxin Su, Shiwen Shan, Jinyang Liu, and Michael R. Lyu. 2023. EvLog: Identifying
anomalous logs over software evolution. In 34th IEEE International Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering
(ISSRE ’23). IEEE, 391–402.
[67] Sangwon Hyun, Mingyu Guo, and M. Ali Babar. 2024. METAL: Metamorphic testing framework for analyzing
large-language model qualities. In 2024 IEEE Conference on Software Testing, Verification and Validation (ICST). IEEE,
117–128.
[68] Md Ashraful Islam, Mohammed Eunus Ali, and Md Rizwan Parvez. 2024. MapCoder: Multi-agent code generation
for competitive problem solving. arXiv:2405.11403. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.11403
[69] ISO/IEC/IEEE International Standard 15288-2023. 2023. Systems and software engineering–System life cycle pro-
cesses, ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288:2023, 1–128. DOI: https:\doi.org.10.1109/IEEESTD.2023.10123367
[70] Nan Jiang, Thibaud Lutellier, and Lin Tan. 2021. CURE: Code-aware neural machine translation for automatic
program repair. In 43rd IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE ’21) . IEEE, 1161–1173.
[71] Siyuan Jiang, Jia Li, He Zong, Huanyu Liu, Hao Zhu, Shukai Hu, Erlu Li, Jiazheng Ding, Yu Han, Wei Ning, et al. 2024.
aiXcoder-7B: A lightweight and effective large language model for code completion. arXiv:2410.13187. Retrieved
from https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.13187
[72] Xue Jiang, Yihong Dong, Lecheng Wang, Fang Zheng, Qiwei Shang, Ge Li, Zhi Jin, and Wenpin Jiao. 2023. Self-
planning code generation with large language models. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology
33, 7 (2023), 1–30.
[73] Zhihan Jiang, Jinyang Liu, Zhuangbin Chen, Yichen Li, Junjie Huang, Yintong Huo, Pinjia He, Jiazhen Gu, and
Michael R. Lyu. 2023. LLMParser: A LLM-based log parsing framework. arXiv:2310.01796. Retrieved from https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2310.01796
[74] Pengxiang Jin, Shenglin Zhang, Minghua Ma, Haozhe Li, Yu Kang, Liqun Li, Yudong Liu, Bo Qiao, Chaoyun Zhang,
Pu Zhao, et al. 2023. Assess and summarize: Improve outage understanding with large language models. In 31st
ACM Joint European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering
(ESEC/FSE ’23). ACM, 1657–1668.
[75] Hyeji Kim, Yihan Jiang, Sreeram Kannan, Sewoong Oh, and Pramod Viswanath. 2018. Deepcode: Feedback codes via
deep learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 31: Annual Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems 2018 (NeurIPS ’18) , 9458–9468.
[76] Myeongsoo Kim, Tyler Stennett, Dhruv Shah, Saurabh Sinha, and Alessandro Orso. 2024. Leveraging large language
models to improve REST API testing. In 2024 ACM/IEEE 44th International Conference on Software Engineering: New
Ideas and Emerging Results , 37–41.
[77] Denis Kocetkov, Raymond Li, Loubna Ben Allal, Jia Li, Chenghao Mou, Carlos Muñoz Ferrandis, Yacine Jernite,
Margaret Mitchell, Sean Hughes, Thomas Wolf, et al. 2022. The stack: 3 tb of permissively licensed source code.
arXiv:2211.15533. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.15533
[78] Oleksii Kononenko, Olga Baysal, Latifa Guerrouj, Yaxin Cao, and Michael W. Godfrey. 2015. Investigating code review
quality: Do people and participation matter? In International Conference on Software Maintenance and Evolution
( ICSME). IEEE Computer Society, 111–120.
[79] Thomas D. LaToza, Gina Venolia, and Robert DeLine. 2006. Maintaining mental models: A study of developer work
habits. In 28th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE ’06) . Leon J. Osterweil, H. Dieter Rombach, and
Mary Lou Soffa (Eds.), ACM, 492–501.
[80] Triet Huynh Minh Le, Huaming Chen, and Muhammad Ali Babar. 2023. A survey on data-driven software vulnerability
assessment and prioritization. ACM Computing Surveys 55, 5 (2023), 100:1–100:39.
[81] Van-Hoang Le and Hongyu Zhang. 2023. Log parsing with prompt-based few-shot learning. In 45th IEEE/ACM
International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE ’23) . IEEE, 2438–2449.
[82] Yoav Levine, Noam Wies, Daniel Jannai, Dan Navon, Yedid Hoshen, and Amnon Shashua. 2021. The inductive bias of
in-context learning: Rethinking pretraining example design. In International Conference on Learning Representations .
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 5, Article 127. Publication date: May 2025.

--- PDF PAGE 26 ---
The Current Challenges of SE in the Era of Large Language Models 127:25
[83] Jia Li, Ge Li, Chongyang Tao, Huangzhao Zhang, Fang Liu, and Zhi Jin. 2023. Large language model-aware in-context
learning for code generation. arXiv:2310.09748. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.09748
[84] Jia Li, Yunfei Zhao, Yongmin Li, Ge Li, and Zhi Jin. 2023. Towards enhancing in-context learning for code generation.
arXiv:2303.17780. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.17780
[85] Lingwei Li, Li Yang, Huaxi Jiang, Jun Yan, Tiejian Luo, Zihan Hua, Geng Liang, and Chun Zuo. 2022. AUGER: Auto-
matically generating review comments with pre-training models. In 30th ACM Joint European Software Engineering
Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering , 1009–1021.
[86] Raymond Li, Loubna Ben Allal, Yangtian Zi, Niklas Muennighoff, Denis Kocetkov, Chenghao Mou, Marc Marone,
Christopher Akiki, Jia Li, Jenny Chim, et al. 2023. StarCoder: May the source be with you! arXiv:2305.06161. Retrieved
from https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.06161
[87] Yuanzhi Li, Sébastien Bubeck, Ronen Eldan, Allie Del Giorno, Suriya Gunasekar, and Yin Tat Lee. 2023. Textbooks
are all you need II: Phi-1.5 technical report. arXiv:2309.05463. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.05463
[88] Yujia Li, David H. Choi, Junyoung Chung, Nate Kushman, Julian Schrittwieser, Rémi Leblond, Tom Eccles, James Keel-
ing, Felix Gimeno, Agustin Dal Lago, et al. 2022. Competition-level code generation with AlphaCode. arXiv:2203.07814.
Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.07814
[89] Zhiyu Li, Shuai Lu, Daya Guo, Nan Duan, Shailesh Jannu, Grant Jenks, Deep Majumder, Jared Green, Alexey
Svyatkovskiy, Shengyu Fu, et al. 2022. Automating code review activities by large-scale pre-training. In 30th ACM
Joint European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE
’22). ACM, 1035–1047.
[90] Zongjie Li, Chaozheng Wang, Zhibo Liu, Haoxuan Wang, Dong Chen, Shuai Wang, and Cuiyun Gao. 2023. CCTEST:
Testing and repairing code completion systems. In 45th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering
(ICSE ’23). IEEE, 1238–1250.
[91] Feng Lin, Dong Jae Kim, and Tse-Husn (Peter) Chen. 2024. When LLM-based code generation meets the software
development process. arXiv:2403.15852. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.15852
[92] Jinfeng Lin, Yalin Liu, Qingkai Zeng, Meng Jiang, and Jane Cleland-Huang. 2021. Traceability transformed: Generating
more accurate links with pre-trained Bert models. In 2021 IEEE/ACM 43rd International Conference on Software
Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 324–335.
[93] Yishuai Lin, Philippe Descamps, Nicolas Gaud, Vincent Hilaire, and Abderrafiaa Koukam. 2015. Multi-agent system
for intelligent Scrum project management. Integrated Computer-Aided Engineering 22, 3 (2015), 281–296.
[94] Richard C. Linger, Harlan D. Mills, and Bernard I. Witt. 1979. Structured Programming - Theory and Practice . Addison-
Wesley.
[95] Shuo Liu, Jacky Keung, Zhen Yang, Fang Liu, Qilin Zhou, and Yihan Liao. 2024. Delving into parameter-efficient
fine-tuning in code change learning: An empirical study. In IEEE International Conference on Software Analysis,
Evolution and Reengineering ( SANER). IEEE, 465–476.
[96] Zhe Liu, Chunyang Chen, Junjie Wang, Xing Che, Yuekai Huang, Jun Hu, and Qing Wang. 2023. Fill in the blank:
Context-aware automated text input generation for mobile GUI testing. In 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 1355–1367.
[97] Zhe Liu, Chunyang Chen, Junjie Wang, Mengzhuo Chen, Boyu Wu, Zhilin Tian, Yuekai Huang, Jun Hu, and Qing
Wang. 2024. Testing the limits: Unusual text inputs generation for mobile app crash detection with large language
model. In IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on Software Engineering , 1–12.
[98] Anton Lozhkov, Raymond Li, Loubna Ben Allal, Federico Cassano, Joel Lamy-Poirier, Nouamane Tazi, Ao Tang,
Dmytro Pykhtar, Jiawei Liu, Yuxiang Wei, et al. 2024. StarCoder 2 and the Stack v2: The next generation.
arXiv:2402.19173. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.19173
[99] Guilong Lu, Xiaolin Ju, Xiang Chen, Wenlong Pei, and Zhilong Cai. 2024. GRACE: Empowering LLM-based software
vulnerability detection with graph structure and in-context learning. Journal of Systems and Software 212 (2024),
112031.
[100] Junyi Lu, Lei Yu, Xiaojia Li, Li Yang, and Chun Zuo. 2023. LLaMA-reviewer: Advancing code review automation
with large language models through parameter-efficient fine-tuning. In 2023 IEEE 34th International Symposium on
Software Reliability Engineering (ISSRE). IEEE, 647–658.
[101] Shuai Lu, Daya Guo, Shuo Ren, Junjie Huang, Alexey Svyatkovskiy, Ambrosio Blanco, Colin B. Clement, Dawn
Drain, Daxin Jiang, Duyu Tang,. 2021. CodeXGLUE: A machine learning benchmark dataset for code understanding
and generation. In Neural Information Processing Systems Track on Datasets and Benchmarks 1, NeurIPS Datasets and
Benchmarks 2021.
[102] Sebastian Lubos, Alexander Felfernig, Thi Ngoc Trang Tran, Damian Garber, Merfat El Mansi, Seda Polat Erdeniz,
and Viet-Man Le. 2024. Leveraging LLMs for the quality assurance of software requirements. In 32nd IEEE Inter-
national Requirements Engineering Conference (RE ’24) . Grischa Liebel, Irit Hadar, and Paola Spoletini (Eds.), IEEE,
389–397.
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 5, Article 127. Publication date: May 2025.

--- PDF PAGE 27 ---
127:26 C. Gao et al.
[103] Xianchang Luo, Yinxing Xue, Zhenchang Xing, and Jiamou Sun. 2022. PRCBERT: Prompt learning for requirement
classification using Bert-based pretrained language models. In 37th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated
Software Engineering, 1–13.
[104] Ziyang Luo, Can Xu, Pu Zhao, Qingfeng Sun, Xiubo Geng, Wenxiang Hu, Chongyang Tao, Jing Ma, Qingwei Lin,
and Daxin Jiang. 2023. WizardCoder: Empowering code large language models with Evol-Instruct. arXiv:2306.08568.
Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.08568
[105] Lezhi Ma, Shangqing Liu, Yi Li, Xiaofei Xie, and Lei Bu. 2024. SpecGen: Automated generation of formal program
specifications via large language models. arXiv:2401.08807. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.08807
[106] Lipeng Ma, Weidong Yang, Bo Xu, Sihang Jiang, Ben Fei, Jiaqing Liang, Mingjie Zhou, and Yanghua Xiao. 2024.
KnowLog: Knowledge enhanced pre-trained language model for log understanding. In 46th IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE ’24) . ACM, 32:1–32:13.
[107] Ambarish Moharil and Arpit Sharma. 2022. Identification of intra-domain ambiguity using transformer-based
machine learning. In 1st International Workshop on Natural Language-based Software Engineering , 51–58.
[108] Ambarish Moharil and Arpit Sharma. 2023. Tabasco: A transformer based contextualization toolkit. Science of
Computer Programming 230 (2023), 102994.
[109] Fangwen Mu, Xiao Chen, Lin Shi, Song Wang, and Qing Wang. 2023. Developer-intent driven code comment
generation. In 45th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE ’23) . IEEE, 768–780.
[110] Noor Nashid, Mifta Sintaha, and Ali Mesbah. 2023. Retrieval-based prompt selection for code-related few-shot
learning. In 45th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE ’23) . IEEE, 2450–2462.
[111] Phuong T. Nguyen, Juri Di Rocco, Claudio Di Sipio, Riccardo Rubei, Davide Di Ruscio, and Massimiliano Di Penta.
2024. GPTSniffer: A CodeBERT-based classifier to detect source code written by ChatGPT. Journal of Systems and
Software 214 (2024), 112059.
[112] Chao Ni, Xin Yin, Kaiwen Yang, Dehai Zhao, Zhenchang Xing, and Xin Xia. 2023. Distinguishing look-alike innocent
and vulnerable code by subtle semantic representation learning and explanation. arXiv:2308.11237. Retrieved from
https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.11237
[113] Erik Nijkamp, Hiroaki Hayashi, Caiming Xiong, Silvio Savarese, and Yingbo Zhou. 2023. CodeGen2: Lessons for
training LLMs on programming and natural languages. arXiv:2305.02309. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/2305.02309
[114] Erik Nijkamp, Bo Pang, Hiroaki Hayashi, Lifu Tu, Huan Wang, Yingbo Zhou, Silvio Savarese, and Caiming Xiong.
2023. CodeGen: An open large language model for code with multi-turn program synthesis. In the 11th International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR ’23) . OpenReview.net.
[115] Bashar Nuseibeh and Steve M. Easterbrook. 2000. Requirements engineering: A roadmap. In 22nd International
Conference on Software Engineering, Future of Software Engineering Track (ICSE ’00) . ACM, 35–46.
[116] Shengyi Pan, Lingfeng Bao, Jiayuan Zhou, Xing Hu, Xin Xia, and Shanping Li. 2024. Towards more practical
automation of vulnerability assessment. In IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE
’24). ACM, New York, NY, Article 148, 13 pages. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/3597503.3639110
[117] Shengyi Pan, Jiayuan Zhou, Filipe Roseiro Cogo, Xin Xia, Lingfeng Bao, Xing Hu, Shanping Li, and Ahmed E. Hassan.
2022. Automated unearthing of dangerous issue reports. In 30th ACM Joint European Software Engineering Conference
and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE ’22) . ACM, New York, NY, 834–846. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3540250.3549156
[118] Eugenio Parra, Jose Luis de la Vara, and Luis Alonso. 2018. Analysis of requirements quality evolution. In 40th
International Conference on Software Engineering: Companion Proceedings (ICSE ’18) . ACM, 199–200.
[119] Ricardo Silva Peres, Xiaodong Jia, Jay Lee, Keyi Sun, Armando Walter Colombo, and Jose Barata. 2020. Industrial
artificial intelligence in industry 4.0-systematic review, challenges and outlook. IEEE Access 8 (2020), 220121–220139.
[120] Laura Plein, Wendkûuni C. Ouédraogo, Jacques Klein, and Tegawendé F. Bissyandé. 2024. Automatic generation of
test cases based on bug reports: A feasibility study with large language models. In 2024 IEEE/ACM 46th International
Conference on Software Engineering: Companion Proceedings , 360–361.
[121] Chanathip Pornprasit and Chakkrit Tantithamthavorn. 2024. GPT-3.5 for code review automation: How do few-
shot learning, prompt design, and model fine-tuning impact their performance? arXiv:2402.00905. Retrieved from
https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.00905
[122] Amrit Poudel, Jinfeng Lin, and Jane Cleland-Huang. 2023. Leveraging transformer-based language models to automate
requirements satisfaction assessment. arXiv:2312.04463. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.04463
[123] Nikitha Rao, Kush Jain, Uri Alon, Claire Le Goues, and Vincent J. Hellendoorn. 2023. CAT-LM training language
models on aligned code and tests. In 2023 38th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering
(ASE). IEEE, 409–420.
[124] Juri Di Rocco, Davide Di Ruscio, Claudio Di Sipio, Phuong T. Nguyen, and Riccardo Rubei. 2024. On the use of large
language models in model-driven engineering. arXiv:2410.17370. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.17370
[125] Krishna Ronanki, Beatriz Cabrero-Daniel, and Christian Berger. 2022. ChatGPT as a tool for user story quality
evaluation: Trustworthy out of the box? In International Conference on Agile Software Development. Springer, 173–181.
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 5, Article 127. Publication date: May 2025.

--- PDF PAGE 28 ---
The Current Challenges of SE in the Era of Large Language Models 127:27
[126] W. W. Royce. 1987. Managing the development of large software systems: Concepts and techniques. In9th International
Conference on Software Engineering . ACM Press, 328–339.
[127] Baptiste Rozière, Jonas Gehring, Fabian Gloeckle, Sten Sootla, Itai Gat, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Yossi Adi, Jingyu Liu, Tal
Remez, Jérémy Rapin, et al. 2023. Code Llama: Open foundation models for code. arXiv:2308.12950. Retrieved from
https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.12950
[128] Teven Le Scao, Angela Fan, Christopher Akiki, Ellie Pavlick, Suzana Ilic, Daniel Hesslow, Roman Castagné, Alexandra
Sasha Luccioni, François Yvon, Matthias Gallé, et al. 2022. BLOOM: A 176B-parameter open-access multilingual
language model. arXiv:2211.05100. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.05100
[129] Bo Shen, Jiaxin Zhang, Taihong Chen, Daoguang Zan, Bing Geng, An Fu, Muhan Zeng, Ailun Yu, Jichuan Ji, Jingyang
Zhao, et al. 2023. PanGu-Coder2: Boosting large language models for code with ranking feedback. arXiv:2307.14936.
Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.14936
[130] Jiho Shin, Sepehr Hashtroudi, Hadi Hemmati, and Song Wang. 2024. Domain adaptation for code model-based unit
test case generation. In 33rd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis , 1211–1222.
[131] Seung Yeob Shin, Fabrizio Pastore, Domenico Bianculli, and Alexandra Baicoianu. 2024. Towards generating exe-
cutable metamorphic relations using large language models. In International Conference on the Quality of Information
and Communications Technology . Springer, 126–141.
[132] Mohammed Latif Siddiq, Joanna Cecilia Da Silva Santos, Ridwanul Hasan Tanvir, Noshin Ulfat, Fahmid Al Rifat, and
Vinícius Carvalho Lopes. 2024. Using large language models to generate JUnit tests: An empirical study. In 28th
International Conference on Evaluation and Assessment in Software Engineering , 313–322.
[133] Mehmet Söylemez, Bedir Tekinerdogan, and Ayça Kolukı ̇sa Tarhan. 2022. Challenges and solution directions of
microservice architectures: A systematic literature review. Applied Sciences 12, 11 (2022), 5507.
[134] Giriprasad Sridhara, Ranjani H. G., and Sourav Mazumdar. 2023. ChatGPT: A study on its utility for ubiquitous
software engineering tasks. arXiv:2305.16837. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.16837
[135] Benjamin Steenhoek, Michele Tufano, Neel Sundaresan, and Alexey Svyatkovskiy. 2023. Reinforcement
learning from automatic feedback for high-quality unit test generation. arXiv:2310.02368. Retrieved from
https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.02368
[136] Robert Boyce Stone. 1997. Towards a Theory of Modular Design . The University of Texas at Austin.
[137] Zhihong Sun, Chen Lyu, Bolun Li, Yao Wan, Hongyu Zhang, Ge Li, and Zhi Jin. 2024. Enhancing code genera-
tion performance of smaller models by distilling the reasoning ability of LLMs. arXiv:2403.13271. Retrieved from
https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.13271
[138] Alexey Svyatkovskiy, Shao Kun Deng, Shengyu Fu, and Neel Sundaresan. 2020. Intellicode compose: Code generation
using transformer. In 28th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the
Foundations of Software Engineering , 1433–1443.
[139] Sumanth Tatineni. 2023. Applying DevOps practices for quality and reliability improvement in cloud-based systems.
Technix International Journal for Engineering Research 10, 11 (2023), 374–380.
[140] Christopher Thompson and David A. Wagner. 2017. A large-scale study of modern code review and security in open
source projects. In PROMISE. ACM, 83–92.
[141] Patanamon Thongtanunam, Chanathip Pornprasit, and Chakkrit Tantithamthavorn. 2022. AutoTransform: Automated
code transformation to support modern code review process. In 44th International Conference on Software Engineering,
237–248.
[142] Zhao Tian, Junjie Chen, and Xiangyu Zhang. 2023. Test-case-driven programming understanding in large language
models for better code generation. arXiv:2309.16120. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.16120
[143] Christos Tsigkanos, Pooja Rani, Sebastian Müller, and Timo Kehrer. 2023. Large language models: The next frontier
for variable discovery within metamorphic testing? In 2023 IEEE International Conference on Software Analysis,
Evolution and Reengineering (SANER). IEEE, 678–682.
[144] Rosalia Tufano. 2023. Automating code review. In ICSE Companion Proceedings. IEEE, 192–196.
[145] Rosalia Tufano, Ozren Dabić, Antonio Mastropaolo, Matteo Ciniselli, and Gabriele Bavota. 2024. Code review
automation: Strengths and weaknesses of the state of the art. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 50, 2 (2024),
338–353.
[146] Rosalia Tufano, Simone Masiero, Antonio Mastropaolo, Luca Pascarella, Denys Poshyvanyk, and Gabriele Bavota.
2022. Using pre-trained models to boost code review automation. In 44th International Conference on Software
Engineering, 2291–2302.
[147] Rosalia Tufano, Luca Pascarella, Michele Tufano, Denys Poshyvanyk, and Gabriele Bavota. 2021. Towards automating
code review activities. In 2021 IEEE/ACM 43rd International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 163–174.
[148] Chaozheng Wang, Junhao Hu, Cuiyun Gao, Yu Jin, Tao Xie, Hailiang Huang, Zhenyu Lei, and Yuetang Deng.
2023. How practitioners expect code completion? In 31st ACM Joint European Software Engineering Conference and
Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE ’23) . Satish Chandra, Kelly Blincoe, and Paolo
Tonella (Eds.), ACM, 1294–1306.
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 5, Article 127. Publication date: May 2025.

--- PDF PAGE 29 ---
127:28 C. Gao et al.
[149] Chaozheng Wang, Yuanhang Yang, Cuiyun Gao, Yun Peng, Hongyu Zhang, and Michael R. Lyu. 2022. No more
fine-tuning? An experimental evaluation of prompt tuning in code intelligence. In 30th ACM Joint European Software
Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE ’22) . ACM, 382–394.
[150] Chaozheng Wang, Yuanhang Yang, Cuiyun Gao, Yun Peng, Hongyu Zhang, and Michael R. Lyu. 2023. Prompt tuning
in code intelligence: An experimental evaluation. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 49, 11 (2023), 4869–4885.
[151] Chong Wang, Jian Zhang, Yebo Feng, Tianlin Li, Weisong Sun, Yang Liu, and Xin Peng. 2024. Teaching
code LLMs to use autocompletion tools in repository-level code generation. arXiv:2401.06391. Retrieved from
https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.06391
[152] Deze Wang, Boxing Chen, Shanshan Li, Wei Luo, Shaoliang Peng, Wei Dong, and Xiangke Liao. 2023. One adapter
for all programming languages? Adapter tuning for code search and summarization. In International Conference on
Software Engineering ( ICSE). IEEE, 5–16.
[153] Jiexin Wang, Xitong Luo, Liuwen Cao, Hongkui He, Hailin Huang, Jiayuan Xie, Adam Jatowt, and Yi Cai. 2024. Is your
AI-generated code really secure? Evaluating large language models on secure code generation with CodeSecEval.
arXiv:2407.02395. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.02395
[154] Yue Wang, Hung Le, Akhilesh Deepak Gotmare, Nghi D. Q. Bui, Junnan Li, and Steven Hoi. 2023. CodeT5+: Open
code large language models for code understanding and generation. In the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing .
[155] Yawen Wang, Lin Shi, Mingyang Li, Qing Wang, and Yun Yang. 2020. A deep context-wise method for coreference
detection in natural language requirements. In 2020 IEEE 28th International Requirements Engineering Conference
(RE). IEEE, 180–191.
[156] Yue Wang, Weishi Wang, Shafiq R. Joty, and Steven C. H. Hoi. 2021. CodeT5: Identifier-aware unified pre-trained
encoder-decoder models for code understanding and generation. In 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP ’21) . Association for Computational Linguistics, 8696–8708.
[157] Zefan Wang, Zichuan Liu, Yingying Zhang, Aoxiao Zhong, Lunting Fan, Lingfei Wu, and Qingsong Wen. 2023. RCA-
gent: Cloud root cause analysis by autonomous agents with tool-augmented large language models. arXiv:2310.16340.
Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.16340
[158] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V. Le, and Denny
Zhou. 2022. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. InAdvances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 24824–24837.
[159] Yuxiang Wei, Zhe Wang, Jiawei Liu, Yifeng Ding, and Lingming Zhang. 2023. Magicoder: Source code is all you
need. arXiv:2312.02120. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.02120
[160] Cheng Wen, Yuandao Cai, Bin Zhang, Jie Su, Zhiwu Xu, Dugang Liu, Shengchao Qin, Zhong Ming, and Tian Cong.
2024. Automatically inspecting thousands of static bug warnings with large language model: How far are we? ACM
Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data 18, 7 (2024), 1–34.
[161] Xin-Cheng Wen, Cuiyun Gao, Jiaxin Ye, Yichen Li, Zhihong Tian, Yan Jia, and Xuan Wang. 2024. Meta-path based
attentional graph learning model for vulnerability detection. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 50, 3 (2024),
360–375.
[162] Xin-Cheng Wen, Xinchen Wang, Yujia Chen, Ruida Hu, David Lo, and Cuiyun Gao. 2024. VulEval: Towards repository-
level evaluation of software vulnerability detection. arXiv:2404.15596. Retrieved fromhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2404.15596
[163] Xin-Cheng Wen, Yupan Chen, Cuiyun Gao, Hongyu Zhang, Jie M. Zhang, and Qing Liao. 2023. Vulnerability detection
with graph simplification and enhanced graph representation learning. In 45th International Conference on Software
Engineering (ICSE ’23) . IEEE Press, 2275–2286. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE48619.2023.00191
[164] Xin-Cheng Wen, Cuiyun Gao, Shuzheng Gao, Yang Xiao, and Michael R. Lyu. 2024. SCALE: Constructing structured
natural language comment trees for software vulnerability detection. In 33rd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium
on Software Testing and Analysis (ISSTA ’24) . ACM, New York, NY, 235–247. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/3650212.
3652124
[165] Xin-Cheng Wen, Xinchen Wang, Cuiyun Gao, Shaohua Wang, Yang Liu, and Zhaoquan Gu. 2024. When less is
enough: Positive and unlabeled learning model for vulnerability detection. In 38th IEEE/ACM International Conference
on Automated Software Engineering (ASE ’23). IEEE Press, 345–357. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/ASE56229.2023.00144
[166] Jules White, Sam Hays, Quchen Fu, Jesse Spencer-Smith, and Douglas C. Schmidt. 2023. ChatGPT prompt patterns
for improving code quality, refactoring, requirements elicitation, and software design. arXiv:2303.07839. Retrieved
from https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.07839
[167] Chunqiu Steven Xia, Matteo Paltenghi, Jia Le Tian, Michael Pradel, and Lingming Zhang. 2024. Fuzz4all: Universal
fuzzing with large language models. In IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on Software Engineering , 1–13.
[168] Danning Xie, Byungwoo Yoo, Nan Jiang, Mijung Kim, Lin Tan, Xiangyu Zhang, and Judy S. Lee. 2023.
Impact of large language models on generating software specifications. arXiv:2306.03324. Retrieved from
https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.03324
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 5, Article 127. Publication date: May 2025.

--- PDF PAGE 30 ---
The Current Challenges of SE in the Era of Large Language Models 127:29
[169] Zhuokui Xie, Yinghao Chen, Chen Zhi, Shuiguang Deng, and Jianwei Yin. 2023. ChatUniTest: A ChatGPT-based
automated unit test generation tool. arXiv:2305.04764. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.04764
[170] Can Xu, Qingfeng Sun, Kai Zheng, Xiubo Geng, Pu Zhao, Jiazhan Feng, Chongyang Tao, and Daxin Jiang. 2023.
WizardLM: Empowering large language models to follow complex instructions. arXiv:2304.12244. Retrieved from
https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.12244
[171] Junjielong Xu, Ziang Cui, Yuan Zhao, Xu Zhang, Shilin He, Pinjia He, Liqun Li, Yu Kang, Qingwei Lin, Yingnong
Dang, et al. 2024. UniLog: Automatic logging via LLM and in-context learning. In 46th IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE ’24) . ACM, 14:1–14:12.
[172] Hao Yan, Thomas D. Latoza, and Ziyu Yao. 2024. IntelliExplain: Enhancing interactive code generation
through natural language explanations for non-professional programmers. arXiv:2405.10250. Retrieved from
https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.10250
[173] An Yang, Baosong Yang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Zhou, Chengpeng Li, Chengyuan Li, Dayiheng
Liu, Fei Huang, et al. 2024. Qwen2 technical report. arXiv:2407.10671. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.10671
[174] Hui Yang, Alistair Willis, Anne N. De Roeck, and Bashar Nuseibeh. 2010. Automatic detection of nocuous coordination
ambiguities in natural language requirements. In 25th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software
Engineering (ASE ’10) . ACM, 53–62.
[175] Zezhou Yang, Cuiyun Gao, Zhaoqiang Guo, Zhenhao Li, Kui Liu, Xin Xia, and Yuming Zhou. 2024. A survey on
modern code review: Progresses, challenges and opportunities. arXiv:2405.18216. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/
abs/2405.18216
[176] Stephen S. Yau and Jeffrey J. P. Tsai. 1986. A survey of software design techniques. IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering 12, 6 (1986), 713–721.
[177] Juyeon Yoon, Robert Feldt, and Shin Yoo. 2023. Autonomous large language model agents enabling intent-driven
mobile GUI testing. arXiv:2311.08649. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.08649
[178] Shengcheng Yu, Chunrong Fang, Yuchen Ling, Chentian Wu, and Zhenyu Chen. 2023. LLM for test script generation
and migration: Challenges, capabilities, and opportunities. In 23rd IEEE International Conference on Software Quality,
Reliability, and Security (QRS ’23) . IEEE, 206–217.
[179] Zhaojian Yu, Xin Zhang, Ning Shang, Yangyu Huang, Can Xu, Yishujie Zhao, Wenxiang Hu, and Qiufeng Yin. 2023.
Wavecoder: Widespread and versatile enhanced instruction tuning with refined data generation. arXiv:2312.14187.
Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.14187
[180] Zhiqiang Yuan, Yiling Lou, Mingwei Liu, Shiji Ding, Kaixin Wang, Yixuan Chen, and Xin Peng. 2023. No more
manual tests? Evaluating and improving ChatGPT for unit test generation. arXiv:2305.04207. Retrieved from https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2305.04207
[181] Daoguang Zan, Bei Chen, Fengji Zhang, Dianjie Lu, Bingchao Wu, Bei Guan, Yongji Wang, and Jian-Guang Lou.
2023. Large language models meet NL2Code: A survey. In 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL ’23). Association for Computational Linguistics, 7443–7464.
[182] Dylan Zhang, Xuchao Zhang, Chetan Bansal, Pedro Henrique B. Las-Casas, Rodrigo Fonseca, and Saravan Rajmohan.
2023. PACE-LM: Prompting and augmentation for calibrated confidence estimation with GPT-4 in cloud incident
root cause analysis. arXiv:2309.05833. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.05833
[183] Fengji Zhang, Bei Chen, Yue Zhang, Jacky Keung, Jin Liu, Daoguang Zan, Yi Mao, Jian-Guang Lou, and Weizhu Chen.
2023. Repocoder: Repository-level code completion through iterative retrieval and generation. arXiv:2303.12570.
Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.12570
[184] Fengji Zhang, Zexian Zhang, Jacky Wai Keung, Xiangru Tang, Zhen Yang, Xiao Yu, and Wenhua Hu. 2024. Data
preparation for deep learning based code smell detection: A systematic literature review. Journal of Systems and
Software 216 (2024), 112131.
[185] Junwei Zhang, Zhongxin Liu, Xing Hu, Xin Xia, and Shanping Li. 2023. Vulnerability detection by learning from
syntax-based execution paths of code. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 49, 8 (2023), 4196–4212.
[186] Kechi Zhang, Jia Li, Ge Li, Xianjie Shi, and Zhi Jin. 2024. CodeAgent: Enhancing code generation with
tool-integrated agent systems for real-world repo-level coding challenges. arXiv:2401.07339. Retrieved from
https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.07339
[187] Kechi Zhang, Huangzhao Zhang, Ge Li, Jia Li, Zhuo Li, and Zhi Jin. 2023. Toolcoder: Teach code generation models
to use API search tools. arXiv:2305.04032. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.04032
[188] Renrui Zhang, Jiaming Han, Chris Liu, Aojun Zhou, Pan Lu, Yu Qiao, Hongsheng Li, and Peng Gao. 2024. LLaMA-
adapter: Efficient fine-tuning of large language models with zero-initialized attention. In International Conference on
Learning Representations ( ICLR). OpenReview.net.
[189] Simiao Zhang, Jiaping Wang, Guoliang Dong, Jun Sun, Yueling Zhang, and Geguang Pu. 2024. Experimenting a new
programming practice with LLMs. arXiv:2401.01062. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.01062
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 5, Article 127. Publication date: May 2025.

--- PDF PAGE 31 ---
127:30 C. Gao et al.
[190] Yifan Zhang, Dave Towey, and Matthew Pike. 2023. Automated metamorphic-relation generation with ChatGPT: An
experience report. In 2023 IEEE 47th Annual Computers, Software, and Applications Conference (COMPSAC). IEEE,
1780–1785.
[191] Qinkai Zheng, Xiao Xia, Xu Zou, Yuxiao Dong, Shan Wang, Yufei Xue, Lei Shen, Zihan Wang, Andi Wang, Yang Li,
et al. 2023. CodeGeeX: A pre-trained model for code generation with multilingual benchmarking on HumanEval-X.
In 29th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD ’23) . ACM, 5673–5684.
[192] Jiayuan Zhou, Michael Pacheco, Jinfu Chen, Xing Hu, Xin Xia, David Lo, and Ahmed E. Hassan. 2023. CoLeFunDa:
Explainable silent vulnerability fix identification. In 45th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE ’23) .
IEEE Press, 2565–2577. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE48619.2023.00214
[193] Xin Zhou, Kisub Kim, Bowen Xu, DongGyun Han, Junda He, and David Lo. 2023. Generation-based code review
automation: How far are we? In 2023 IEEE/ACM 31st International Conference on Program Comprehension (ICPC).
IEEE, 215–226.
Received 5 April 2024; revised 18 December 2024; accepted 18 December 2024
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 5, Article 127. Publication date: May 2025.