--- PDF PAGE 1 ---
1
A Survey on Large Language Models for
Software Engineering
Quanjun Zhang, Chunrong Fang, Y ang Xie, Y axin Zhang, Yun Y ang, Weisong Sun, Shengcheng Yu,
Zhenyu Chen
Abstract—Software Engineering (SE) is the systematic design, development, maintenance, and management of software applications
underpinning the digital infrastructure of our modern world. Very recently, the SE community has seen a rapidly increasing number of
techniques employing Large Language Models (LLMs) to automate a broad range of SE tasks. Nevertheless, existing information of the
applications, effects, and possible limitations of LLMs within SE is still not well-studied.
In this paper, we provide a systematic survey to summarize the current state-of-the-art research in the LLM-based SE community.
We summarize 62 representative LLMs of Code across three model architectures, 15 pre-training objectives across four categories,
and 16 downstream tasks across five categories. We then present a detailed summarization of the recent SE studies for which LLMs
are commonly utilized, including 947 studies for 112 specific code-related tasks across five crucial phases within the SE workflow. We
also discuss several critical aspects during the integration of LLMs into SE, such as empirical evaluation, benchmarking, security and
reliability, domain tuning, compressing and distillation. Finally, we highlight several challenges and potential opportunities on applying
LLMs for future SE studies, such as exploring domain LLMs and constructing clean evaluation datasets. Overall, our work can help
researchers gain a comprehensive understanding about the achievements of the existing LLM-based SE studies and promote the
practical application of these techniques. Our artifacts are publicly available and will be continuously updated at the living repository:
https://github.com/iSEngLab/AwesomeLLM4SE.
Index Terms—Software Engineering, Large Language Model, AI and Software Engineering, LLM4SE
✦
1 I NTRODUCTION
Software engineering (SE) stands as an essential pursuit
focused on systematically and predictably designing, de-
veloping, testing, and maintaining software systems [1]. As
software increasingly becomes the infrastructure of various
industries ( e.g., transportation, healthcare, and education)
nowadays, SE plays a crucial role in modern society by
ensuring software systems are built in a systematic, reliable,
and efficient manner [2]. As a very active area, SE has been
extensively investigated in the literature and has sustained
attention from both the academic and industrial communi-
ties for several decades [3], [4].
Very recently, one of the most transformative advance-
ments in the realm of SE is the emergence of large language
models (LLMs). Advanced LLMs ( e.g., BERT [5], T5 [6] and
GPT [7]) have significantly improved performance across
a wide range of natural language processing (NLP) tasks,
such as machine translation and text classification. Typically,
such models are pre-trained to derive generic language
• Quanjun Zhang, Chunrong Fang, Yang Xie, Yaxin Zhang, Shengcheng
Yu and Zhenyu Chen are with the State Key Laboratory for Novel Software
Technology, Nanjing University, China.
E-mail: quanjun.zhang@smail.nju.edu.cn, fangchunrong@nju.edu.cn, se-
rialxy@outlook.com, zhangyaxin032@gmail.com, yusc@smail.nju.edu.cn,
zychen@nju.edu.cn
• Weisong Sun is with the School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Nanyang Technological University.
E-mail: weisong.sun@ntu.edu.sg.
• Yun Yang is with the Department of Computing Technologies, Swinburne
University of Technology, Melbourne, VIC 3122, Australia.
E-mail: yyang@swin.edu.au
representations by self-supervised training on large-scale
unlabeled data and then are transferred to benefit multiple
downstream tasks by supervised fine-tuning on limited
labeled data. Inspired by the success of LLMs in NLP ,
many recent attempts have been adopted to boost numer-
ous code-related tasks ( e.g., code summarization and code
search) with LLMs ( e.g., CodeBERT [8] and CodeT5 [9]).
The application of LLMs to SE has had a profound impact
on the field, transforming how developers approach code-
related tasks automatically. For example, ChatGPT [10], one
of the most notable LLMs with billions of parameters, has
demonstrated remarkable performance in a variety of tasks,
showcasing the potential of LLMs to revolutionize the SE
industry. Overall, the SE community has seen a rapidly
increasing number of a broad range of SE studies equipped
with LLMs, already yielding substantial benefits and further
demonstrating a promising future in follow-up research.
However, the complex SE workflow ( e.g., software de-
velopment, testing, and maintenance) and a mass of specific
code-related tasks ( e.g., vulnerability detection, fault local-
ization, and program repair) make it difficult for interested
researchers to understand state-of-the-art LLM-based SE re-
search and improve upon them. Besides, the constant emer-
gence of advanced LLMs with different architectures, train-
ing methods, sources, and a plethora of fine-tuning methods
brings challenges in keeping pace with and effectively uti-
lizing these advancements. For example, researchers have
conducted various studies to extensively investigate the ef-
fectiveness of LLMs in the field of program repair [11], [11],
[12]. These studies encompass different research aspects
(e.g., empirical and technical studies [13]), types of LLMs
arXiv:2312.15223v2  [cs.SE]  8 Sep 2024

--- PDF PAGE 2 ---
2
(e.g., open-source or closed-source [11]), mode architectures
(e.g., encoder-decoder or encoder-only [12]), model parame-
ters (e.g., CodeT5-60M and InCoder-6B [14]), types of bugs
(e.g., semantic bugs and security vulnerabilities [15]), and
utilization paradigms ( e.g., fine-tuning [16], few-shot [17]
and zero-shot [18]).
In this paper, we summarize existing work and provide
a retrospection of the LLM-based community field after
years of rapid development. Community researchers can
have a thorough understanding of the advantages and
limitations of the existing LLM-based SE techniques. We
discuss how LLMs are integrated into specific tasks in the
typical workflow of SE research. Based on our analysis, we
point out the current challenges and suggest possible future
directions for LLM-based SE research. Overall, our work
provides a comprehensive review of the current progress
of the LLM-based SE community, enabling researchers to
obtain an overview of this thriving field and make progress
toward advanced practices.
Contributions. To sum up, the main contributions of this
paper are as follows:
• Survey Methodology. We conduct a detailed analysis of
1009 relevant SE studies empowered with LLMs in
terms of publication trends and distribution of venues
until mytime.
• LLM Perspective. We summarize 62 representative LLMs
of Code for the SE community according to different
aspects, such as model architectures, pre-training objec-
tives, downstream tasks, and open science.
• SE Perspective. We explore the typical application of
leveraging the advance of recent LLMs to automate the
SE research, involving 947 relevant studies for 112 code-
related tasks across five SE phases,i.e., software require-
ments and design, software development, software test-
ing, software maintenance and software management.
• Integration Perspective. We discuss some crucial aspects
when LLMs are integrated into the SE field, such as
evaluation, benchmarking, security and reliability, and
domain tuning.
• Outlook and challenges. We pinpoint open research chal-
lenges and provide several practical guidelines on ap-
plying LLMs for future SE studies.
Comparison with Existing Surveys. In 2022, Watson et
al. [19], Wang et al. [20] and Yang et al. [3] present a
systematic literature review of research at the intersection
of SE and ML&DL. Such surveys mainly concentrate on
the application of ML or DL techniques in SE rather than
more powerful and rapidly emerging LLMs. Besides, Niu et
al. [21] and Zan et al. [22] present a survey to summarize 20
and 27 LLMs for natural-language-to-code (NL4Code) tasks.
Such surveys are limited to a narrow research scope, i.e.,
NL2Code, thus ignoring the more complex and challenging
SE domain. Thus, our work focuses on the foundations
of recently emerged LLMs within the crucial SE research,
particularly covering 112 specific tasks across five crucial SE
phases, i.e., software requirement & design, development,
testing, maintenance and management phases, as well as
corresponding integration studies.
In addition to the aforementioned published papers,
we notice there exist some pre-print works that explore
the integration of LLMs with SE. While these unpublished
papers are concurrent with our work, there remain some
fundamental differences. Wang et al. [4] provide a review of
LLMs in software testing, while our work targets the whole
SE scope rather than a single SE phase. Fan et al. [23] discuss
the achievements and challenges of LLMs in SE, and Hou et
al. [24] conduct a systematic literature review on LLM4SE.
Despite the close relevance of these two works to this paper,
the key distinction lies in our three-fold focus on LLMs ( i.e.,
Section 3), SE ( i.e., Section 4), and the integration of both
(i.e., Section 5), Unlike the first work only taking a bird’s-
eye view of the LLM-based SE achievements or the second
work involving complicated aspects, e.g., data processing
and metrics. We also release the first public repository to
track the latest progress through crowd-sourcing, and we
believe it will contribute to the ongoing development of
the community. Lastly, our survey summarizes the existing
studies until August 2024.
Paper Organization. The remainder of this paper is or-
ganized as follows. Section 2 provides a detailed exposition
of three research questions and the methodology employed
for conducting the survey. Sections 3 summarize existing
LLMs of source code. Section 4 illustrates existing SE studies
empowered with LLMs. Section 5 summarizes the crucial
aspects during the integration of LLMs into SE. Section 6
highlights the challenges and promising opportunities for
future research. Section 7 draws the conclusions.
Availability. All artifacts of this study are available in
the following public repository. The living repository contin-
uously updates the latest research on LLMs, LLM4SE, and
related studies.
https://github.com/iSEngLab/AwesomeLLM4SE
2 S URVEY METHODOLOGY
2.1 Research Questions
To provide a comprehensive overview of LLMs and the
current achievements in SE, our work aims to address the
following research questions (RQs):
• RQ1 (LLM Perspective): What LLMs are designed to
support SE tasks?
– RQ1.1: What LLMs have been released?
– RQ1.2: What pre-training tasks have been used to
train LLMs?
– RQ1.3: What downstream tasks are LLMs spread to?
– RQ1.4: How are LLMs open-sourced to support the
open science community?
• RQ2 (SE Perspective): What SE tasks are facilitated by
LLMs?
• RQ3 (Integration Perspective): What are the key factors
during the integration of LLMs into SE?
To answer RQ1, we summarize LLMs in the SE litera-
ture from four aspects: LLM categories in Section 3.1, pre-
training tasks in Section 3.2, downstream tasks in Sec-
tion 3.3, and open-science in Section 3.4. To answer RQ2,
we investigate SE tasks that have been facilitated by LLMs
from five aspects: software requirements & design in Sec-
tion 4.1, software development in Section 4.2, software
testing in Section 4.3, software maintenance in Section 4.4
and software management in Section 4.5. To answer RQ3,

--- PDF PAGE 3 ---
3
4 6 11 15 269 26
80
361
470
13 32
91
376
496
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
2020 2021 2022 2023 2024
number of papers
year
LLMs of Code SE studies sum
Fig. 1: Number of collected papers over years
we analyze challenges and achievements during the inte-
gration of LLMs into SE from four aspects: i.e., evaluation
and benchmarking in Section 5.1, security and reliability in
Section 5.2, domain tuning in Section 5.3, compressing and
distillation in Section 5.4.
2.2 Search Strategy
Following existing DL for SE surveys [20], [3], [19], we
divide the search keywords used for searching papers into
two groups: (1) a SE-related group containing some com-
monly used keywords related to SE research; and (2) an
LLM-related group containing some keywords related to
LLM research. Besides, considering a significant amount
of relevant papers from SE, AI, and NLP communities,
following Zhang et al. [25], we attempt to identify some
preliminary search keywords from three sources: (1) exist-
ing LLM surveys [22] to derive LLM-related keywords; (2)
existing SE surveys [20], [19] to derive SE-related keywords;
(3) a limited number of LLM-based SE research papers
manually collected from top-tier conferences and journals
beforehand to refine LLM-related and SE-related keywords.
The search strategy can capture the most relevant studies
from existing surveys while achieving better efficiency than
a purely manual search. Finally, the complete set of search
keywords is as follows.
• SE-related Keywords: Software Engineering, SE, Soft-
ware Requirements, Software Design, Software Devel-
opment, Software Testing, Software Maintenance, Code
generation, Code Search, Code Completion, Code Sum-
marization, Fault Detection, Fault Localization, Vul-
nerability Prediction, Testing Minimization, Test Gen-
eration, Fuzzing, GUI testing, NLP testing, Program
Repair, Code Review, Vulnerability Repair, Patch Cor-
rectness.
• LLM-related Keywords: LLM, Large Language Model,
Language Model, LM, PLM, Pre-trained model, Pre-
training, Natural Language Processing, NLP , Machine
Learning, ML, Deep Learning, DL, Artificial Intelli-
gence, AI, Transformer, BERT, Codex, GPT, T5, Chat-
GPT.
Our survey focuses on LLMs in the field of SE, encom-
passing existing LLMs and their applications in SE work-
flow. Thus, we classify papers that need to be summarized
into two categories. For LLMs research, we search for papers
whose titles contain the second keyword set. For LLM-based
SE research, a paper is considered relevant only if it contains
both sets of keywords. Then we conduct an automated
search on three widely used databases until August 2024,
i.e., Google Scholar repository, ACM Digital Library, and
IEEE Explorer Digital Library. Finally, we retrieve a total of
32,560 papers from three databases by automated keyword
searching.
2.3 Study Selection
Once the potentially relevant studies based on our search
strategy are collected, we conduct a three-stage paper fil-
tering to further determine which papers are relevant to
this survey. First, we attempt to filter out the papers before
2017, considering that the Transformer architecture [26] is
proposed in 2017, which is the foundation of LLMs. Second,
we automatically filter out any paper less than 7 pages
and duplicated papers. Third, we inspect the remaining
papers manually to decide whether they are relevant to the
LLM-based SE field according to some quality assessment
criteria. The manual inspection is conducted independently
by two authors, and any paper with different decisions
will be handed over to a third author to make the final
decision. As a result, we collect 59 papers related to the code
LLM research and 912 papers related to the LLM-based SE
research.
To mitigate potential omissions in our automated search
and to ensure a thorough collection of papers, we further
employed a snowballing search strategy [19]. Snowballing
involves meticulously reviewing the reference lists and ci-
tations of each paper to uncover additional relevant studies
that our initial search may have missed. In particular, we
look at every reference within the collected papers and
determine if any of those references are relevant to our
study. Through this rigorous manual analysis, we succeed
in additionally identifying three papers related to LLMs and

--- PDF PAGE 4 ---
4
TABLE 1: Venue Distribution of Collected Papers
Acronym Venues Type # Publications
arXiv N.A. N.A. 382
ICSE International Conference on Software Engineering C 95
FSE International Conference on the Foundations of Software Engineering C 51
ACL Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics C 31
ASE International Conference on Automated Software Engineering C 30
ISSTA International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis C 28
TSE Transactions on Software Engineering J 26
ICLR International Conference on Learning Representations C 20
TOSEM Transactions on Software Engineering Methodology C 20
SANER International Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution, and Reengineering C 17
EMNLP Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing C 16
ICML International Conference on Machine Learning C 15
ICSME International Conference on Software Maintenance and Evolution C 15
MSR Mining Software Repositories C 15
JSS Journal of Systems and Software J 12
NeurIPS Neural Information Processing Systems C 12
ICPC International Collegiate Programming Contest C 11
AAAI Association for the advance of Artificial Intelligence C 10
COMPSAC International Computer Software and Applications Conference C 9
USENIX USENIX Security Symposium C 9
ICST International Conference on Software Testing C 8
Internetware Asia-Pacific Symposium on Internetware C 8
ISSRE International Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering C 8
IST Information and Software Technology J 8
NAACL North American Association of computational linguistics C 8
APSEC Asia-Pacific Software Engineering Conference C 7
AUSE Automated software engineering J 6
ESEM International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement C 6
EASE International Conference on Evaluation and Assessment in Software Engineering C 5
EMSE Empirical Software Engineering J 5
36 papers related to LLM-based SE, thereby enriching our
survey with a diverse range of insights.
2.4 Trend Observation
We finally obtain 1009 relevant research papers after au-
tomated searching and manual inspection. Figure 1 shows
the number of collected papers from 2020 to 2024, It can be
observed that studies on proposing LLMs and their appli-
cations in SE have rapidly increased since 2020, indicating
the growing recognition among researchers of LLMs as a
viable and promising approach to automating SE tasks. One
possible reason is that DL technologies have already shown
promising performance in various SE tasks over the past
several years [19]. As a derivative of DL, LLMs bring more
powerful code understanding capabilities with larger model
sizes and training datasets, demonstrating the potential
of being a brand-new way to address SE problems. The
second reason is the recent flourishing of the open-source
community, which provides millions or even hundreds of
millions of open-source code snippets, laying the foundation
for training such LLMs.
Table 1 further shows the number of collected papers
across different venues. The first two columns list the venue
and its acronym, the third column indicates whether it is
a conference or journal, and the final column shows the
number of publications. We only present the top-30 venues
with the highest number of publications due to page limita-
tions. First, we find that these papers span multiple research
fields, including SE, NLP , AI, and Security, which indicates
the wide range of attention this direction has received.
Second, unlike previous work [27], [28], it can be found
that a significant number of papers (382/1009) have not
been peer-reviewed. The reason behind this phenomenon
lies in the rapid development in this field, especially after
the release of the ChatGPT model at the end of 2022, which
has stimulated a considerable amount of research in SE.
Third, the top five venues are top-tier conferences (ICSE,
FSE, ACL, ASE and ISSTA), and 25 venues among the top-
30 ones are conferences, indicating a current inclination
towards conferences in this field due to the timeliness of
conference proceedings.
3 RQ1: LLM P ERSPECTIVE
In this section, we summarize existing representative LLMs
of Code in Section 3.1, pre-training tasks in Section 3.2, fine-
tuning tasks in Section 3.3, and discuss the open science
issue in Section 3.4. The detailed taxonomy is presented in
Figure 2, including the three sub-RQs and their correspond-
ing categorizations.
3.1 RQ1.1: What LLMs have been released to support
SE?
Typically, existing LLMs can be classified into three types
according to the model architecture, i.e., encoder-only,
decoder-only, and encoder-decoder models. Table 2 presents
the summary and comparison of these representative

--- PDF PAGE 5 ---
5
RQ1: LLMs of Code
RQ1.1: Taxonomy of
Code LLMs
(Section3.1)
Encoder-only LLMs CuBERT [29], CodeBERT [8], GraphCodeBERT [30], SOBertBase [31], CodeSage,
CoLSBERT[32]
Encoder-Decoder LLMs
PYMT5 [33], T5-Learning [34], PLBART [35], CodeT5 [9], UniXcoder [36], SPT-Code [37],
CodeRL [38], CoditT5 [39], AlphaCode [40], CodeT5+ [41], JuPyT5 [42], ERNIE-Code [43],
PPOCoder [44], RLTF [45], CCT5 [46], B-Coder [47], AST-T5 [48], GrammarT5 [49]
Decoder-only LLMs
GPT-C [50], CodeGPT [51], Codex [52], PolyCoder [53], CodeGen [54], InCoder [14],
PyCodeGPT [55], SantaCoder [56], StarCoder [57], PanGu-Coder [58], PanGu-Coder2 [59],
PaLM-Coder [60], CodeGeeX [61], CodeGen2 [62], Code Llama [63], BLOOM [64],
CodeFuse [65], CodeShell [66], Lemur [67], Magicoder [68], OctoCoder [69], OctoGeeX [69],
WizardCoder [70], AlchemistCoder [71], AutoCoderr [72], CodeGemma [73], CodeQwen1.5,
DeepSeek-Coder [74], DeepSeek-Coder-V2 [75], DolphCoder [76], Granite [77], XFT [78],
InverseCoder [79], NT-Java [80], StarCoder2 [81], StepCoder, UniCoder [82], WaveCoder [83]
RQ1.2: Pre-training Tasks
(Section 0.2)
Code Sequence Modeling
and Prediction
Causal Language Modeling (CLM), Masked Language Modeling(MLM),
Masked Span Prediction (MSP), Masked Identifier Prediction (MIP),
Replaced Token Detection (RTD), Modified Masked Sequence-to-Sequence (MASS),
Span Denoising (SD)
Bidirectional Understanding and
Generation between Code
and Natural Language
Bimodal Dual Generation (BDG), The Method Name Generation (MNG)
Code Structure and Relationship
Understanding Identifier Tagging (IT), Edge Prediction (EP), Node Alignment (NA), Code-AST Prediction (CAP)
Cross-modal Representation
Learning Multi-modal Contrastive Learning (MCL), Cross-modal generation (CMG)
RQ1.3: Downstream Tasks
(Section 3.3)
Code-Code Code Translation, Code Refinement, Cloze Test, Mutant Generation, Assertion Generation
Text-Code Code Generation, Code Search
Code-Text Code Summarization
Code-Label Code Classification, Clone Detection, Defect Detection
Fig. 2: Taxonomy of RQ1
LLMs1. The columns summarize the year of release, model
name, the publisher or the conference where the model
is introduced, the architecture types, and the initialization
method or the base model used for pre-training.
From Table 2, it can be found that these LLMs are
usually derived from foundational architectures in the NLP
community and trained with some code-aware objectives. A
considerable number of LLMs (e.g., CodeBERT and CodeT5)
are introduced by leading companies ( e.g., Microsoft and
Google). The possible reason is that the resources to train
these highly parametric models and to collect vast datasets
far exceed the capabilities of the academic community.
Third, inspired by the success of foundational LLMs like
ChatGPT, the size of model parameters continues to set
new benchmarks, and decoder-only architectures are gain-
ing increasing popularity. In the following, we summarize
these LLMs according to their model architectures. More
detailed information about these specific LLMs is included
in Appendix A.
3.1.1 Encoder-only LLMs
Encoder-only LLMs refer to a class of LLMs that utilize only
the encoder stack of the Transformer architecture. Regarding
architecture, encoder-only models use multiple layers of en-
coders and each encoder layer consists of a multi-head self-
attention mechanism followed by feed-forward neural net-
works. Regarding training, encoder-only LLMs are typically
1. We note that some general-purpose LLMs (not limited to source
code) have been applied in the field of SE, such as PaLM, Qwen,
LLaMA, and Gemini. However, such LLMs have already been ex-
tensively reviewed in NLP and AI communities, so they fall outside
the scope of our work. For more details, please refer to the relevant
works [84], [85].
pre-trained on a massive corpus using a masked language
modeling (MLM) task, which is used to learn to predict
the identity of masked words based on their context. Re-
garding usage, because encoder-only LLMs generate fixed-
size representations for variable-length input text, they are
particularly suited for tasks that require understanding the
context or meaning of a piece of text without generating
new text, such as code search and vulnerability detection.
Among various encoder-only LLMs, BERT [5] has been
acknowledged as a foundational work in the NLP field and
provides crucial guidance for the conception and develop-
ment of follow-up code-related LLM works. For example,
CuBERT [29] is the first adaption of BERT from NLP to the
source code domain by replicating the training procedure of
BERT on a Python code corpus. CodeBERT [8] is a bimodal
variant of BERT that takes into account both natural lan-
guage and programming language. GraphCodeBERT [30] is
a structure-aware extension of CodeBERT that incorporates
data flow graphs to capture the structural and semantic
relationships within the source code.
3.1.2 Encoder-decoder LLMs
Encoder-decoder LLMs refer to a class of LLMs that utilize
both the encoder and decoder parts of the Transformer
architecture, working in tandem to transform one sequence
into another. In particular, the encoder takes the input
sequence and compresses its information into a fixed-size
hidden state, which can capture the essence or meaning of
the input sequence, while the decoder takes the hidden state
and produces the corresponding output sequence, step by
step, often using attention mechanisms to refer back to parts
of the input sequence as needed. Thus, this architecture is
particularly suited for sequence-to-sequence tasks in NLP

--- PDF PAGE 6 ---
6
TABLE 2: A Summary and Comparison of LLMs of Code.
Year Model Publisher Architecture Size Tokenizer Init Organization Public
2020 CodeBERT ICML Encoder-only 350M N.A. BERT Google, IISC Yes
2020 CuBERT EMNLP Encoder-only 125M WordPiece Scratch HIT, Microsoft Yes
2020 GPT-C FSE Decoder-only 366M BPE GPT-2 Microsoft No
2020 PyMT5 EMNLP Encoder-Decoder 374M BBPE GPT-2 Microsoft No
2021 CodeGPT NeurIPS Decoder-only 124M BBPE GPT-2 PKU, Microsoft Yes
2021 CodeT5 EMNLP Encoder-Decoder 60M,220M BBPE Scratch Salesforce Yes
2021 Codex arXiv Decoder-only 12M,25M,42M,85M,
300M,679M,2.5B,12B BBPE GPT-3 OpenAI No
2021 GraphCodeBERT ICLR Encoder-only 125M WordPiece Scratch Microsoft, SYSU Yes
2021 PLBART NAACL Encoder-Decoder 140M,406M SentencePiece Scratch UC Yes
2021 T5-Learning ICSE Encoder-Decoder 60M SentencePiece T5 USI Yes
2022 AlphaCode Science Encoder-Decoder 300M,3B,9B,41B SentencePiece Scratch DeepMind No
2022 BLOOM NeurIPS Encoder-Decoder 770M BBPE CodeT5 Salesforce Yes
2022 CodeRL ASE Encoder-Decoder 220M BBPE CodeT5 UTexas Yes
2022 CoditT5 ACL Encoder-Decoder 560M SentencePiece Scratch Baidu Yes
2022 JuPyT5 arXiv Encoder-Decoder 300M BBPE PyMT5 Microsoft Yes
2022 PaLM-Coder arXiv Decoder-only 8B,62B,540B SentencePiece Scratch Google No
2022 PanGu-Coder arXiv Decoder-only 317M,2.6B SentencePiece Scratch Huawei No
2022 PolyCoder ICLR Decoder-only 41B,160M,400M BPE GPT-2 CMU Yes
2022 PyCodeGPT IJCAI Decoder-only 110M BPE GPT-Neo Microsoft, CAS Yes
2022 SPT-Code ICSE Encoder-Decoder 262M BPE Scratch Nanjing University Yes
2022 UnixCoder ACL Encoder-Decoder 125M WordPiece Scratch Microsoft, SYSU Yes
2023 CCT5 arXiv Decoder-only 13B,7B,34B SentencePiece Llama2 Meta Yes
2023 Code Llama ICSE Decoder-only 13B BPE GPT-NeoX Ant Group Yes
2023 CodeFuse KDD Decoder-only 13B BBPE GPT-2 Tsinghua, Zhipu.AI Yes
2023 CodeGen ICLR Decoder-only 350M,2.7B,6.1B,16.1B BPE Scratch Salesforce Yes
2023 CodeGen2 ICLR Decoder-only 16B,3.7B,7B BPE Scratch Salesforce Yes
2023 CodeShell arXiv Decoder-only 7B BPE GPT-2 PKU Yes
2023 CodeT5+ EMNLP Encoder-Decoder 770M,2B,6B,16B BBPE CodeT5 Salesforce Yes
2023 ERNIE-Code ICLR Decoder-only 6.7B,1.3B BBPE Scratch CMU, Meta, UW Yes
2023 InCoder ICLR Decoder-only 70B BBPE Llama2 HKU Yes
2023 PanGu-Coder2 ICML Decoder-only 7B BPE CodeLlama,DeepSeekCoder UIUC Yes
2023 PPOCoder ICLR Decoder-only 16B BBPE StarCoder Hugging Face Yes
2023 RLTF ICLR Decoder-only 6B BBPE CodeGeeX2 Hugging Face Yes
2023 SantaCoder arXiv Decoder-only 15B SentencePiece PanGu-Coder Huawei No
2023 SOBertBase TMLR Encoder-Decoder 770M,220M BBPE CodeT5 Virginia Tech Yes
2023 StarCoder TMLR Encoder-Decoder 770M N.A. CodeT5 Tencent Yes
2024 AlchemistCoder ICLR Decoder-only 1.1B BPE Scratch Hugging Face Yes
2024 AST-T5 TMLR Decoder-only 15.5B BBPE GPT-2 Hugging Face Yes
2024 AutoCoder ICLR Decoder-only 15B BBPE StarCoder Microsoft, HKBU Yes
2024 B-Coder arXiv Decoder-only 7B,6.7B N.A. CodeLlama,Llama2,
DeepSeekCoder Tongji University Yes
2024 CodeGeeX ICML Encoder-Decoder 277M BPE T5 UC Berkeley, Meta Yes
2024 CodeGemma arXiv Decoder-only 6.7B,33B BPE DeepSeekCoder UCONN Yes
2024 CodeQwen1.5 ICLR Encoder-Decoder 770M BBPE T5 UIC Yes
2024 CodeSage arXiv Decoder-only 2B,7B BPE Gemma DeepMind Yes
2024 CoLSBERT arXiv Decoder-only 7B BPE Qwen1.5 Alibaba Yes
2024 DeepSeek-Coder ICLR Encoder-only 130M,356M,1.3B SentencePiece Scratch AWS AI Labs Yes
2024 DeepSeek-Coder-V2 arXiv Encoder-only 354M,757M,124M,1.5B BPE Scratch IDEA Yes
2024 DolphCoder arXiv Decoder-only 1.3B,6.7B,33B BPE Scratch PKU Yes
2024 GrammarT5 arXiv Decoder-only 16B,236B BPE DeepSeek-V2 PKU Yes
2024 Granite ACL Decoder-only 7B,13B N.A. CodeLlama BUPT Yes
2024 InverseCoder arXiv Decoder-only 3B,8B,20B,34B BPE Scratch IBM Yes
2024 Lemur arXiv Decoder-only 6.7B,7B N.A. CodeLlama,DeepSeekCoder UCAS, CAS Yes
2024 Magicoder arXiv Decoder-only 1.1B BBPE StarCoder Infosys Limited Yes
2024 NT-Java arXiv Decoder-only 3B,7B,15B BBPE StarCoder Hugging Face Yes
2024 OctoCoder ACL Decoder-only 6.7B N.A. DeepSeekCoder Fudan Yes
2024 OctoGeeX FSE Encoder-Decoder 220M BBPE CodeT5 NUDT Yes
2024 StarCoder2 arXiv Decoder-only 176B BPE Scratch BigScience Workshop Yes
2024 StepCoder arXiv Encoder-only 109M,762M BPE Scratch CMU No
2024 UniCoder ACL Decoder-only 6.7B,7B BPE DeepSeekCoder BUAA Yes
2024 WaveCoder ACL Decoder-only 15B,7B,6.7B,13B BBPE StarCoder,CodeLlama,
DeepSeekCoder Microsoft Yes
2024 WizardCoder ACL Decoder-only 1.3B BPE DeepSeekCoder UIUC Yes
2024 XFT ICSE Encoder-Decoder 60M,220M BBPE CodeT5 PKU Yes
and SE, where the input and output sequences can be of dif-
ferent lengths and structures, such as code summarization
and program repair.
Among existing encoder-decoder LLMs, T5 (Text-to-Text
Transfer Transformer) is a significant development in the
NLP field and serves as a catalyst for follow-up code-
related works. For example, similar to CuBERT [29] in the
encoder-only LLM domain, PYMT5 [33] is the first attempt
to apply T5 to source code by replicating the pre-training
process of T5 on a code corpus. In parallel with PYMT5 [33],
T5-learning [34] empirically investigate how T5 performs
when pre-trained with CodeSearchNet and fine-tuned to
support four code-related tasks. PLABRT [35] is pre-trained
with the denoising objective and built on the BART ar-
chitecture. CodeT5 [8] represents a well-known adaption
of T5 from NLP to the source code domain by leveraging
the code semantics from the developer-assigned identifiers.
CoditT5 [39] is a variant of CodeT5 particularly trained to
tackle code editing tasks, such as code review. Researchers
also release some encoder-decoder LLM for specific scenar-
ios, such as AlphaCode [40] is introduced by DeepMind to
generate solutions for competitive programming problems
and JuPyT5 [42] for Jupyter Notebook.
3.1.3 Decoder-only LLMs
Decoder-only LLMs refer to a class of LLMs that utilize only
the decoder portion of the Transformer architecture. Unlike
encoder-decoder models, which map an input sequence to
an output sequence, decoder-only models primarily focus
on generating text based on a given context or prompt.

--- PDF PAGE 7 ---
7
TABLE 3: A summary and comparison of pre-training objectiveness in existing LLMs of Code
Category Task
Code Sequence Modeling and Prediction
Causal Language Modeling (CLM)
Masked Language Modeling (MLM)
Masked Span Prediction (MSP)
Masked Identifier Prediction (MIP)
Replaced Token Detection (RTD)
Modified Masked Sequence-to-Sequence (MASS)
Span Denoising (SD)
Bidirectional Understanding and
Generation between Code and Natural Language
Bimodal Dual Generation (BDG)
The Method Name Generation (MNG)
Code Structure and Relationship Understanding
Identifier Tagging (IT)
Edge Prediction (EP)
Node Alignment (NA)
Code-AST Prediction (CAP)
Cross-modal Representation Learning Multi-modal Contrastive Learning (MCL)
Cross-modal generation (CMG)
In particular, decoder-only models use multiple layers of
decoders from the Transformer architecture. Each decoder
layer consists of a multi-head self-attention mechanism
followed by feed-forward neural networks. These models
are designed to generate text autoregressively, meaning
they produce one token at a time and use what has been
generated so far as context for subsequent tokens.
Among existing decoder-only LLMs, GPT (Generative
Pre-trained Transformer) and its subsequent versions (like
GPT-2, GPT-3, and so on) are the most well-known exam-
ples of decoder-only LLMs. Early efforts focus on adapting
the GPT series models for the code domain, leading to
LLMs such as GPT-C [50], CodeGPT [51], PolyCoder [53],
and PyCodeGPT [55]. Subsequent advancements have seen
the introduction of various specialized LLMs tailored for
code generation and understanding tasks with advanced
training techniques and large-scale datasets. Examples in-
clude CodeGen [54], InCoder [14], SantaCoder [56], Star-
Coder [57], CodeGeeX [61], and CodeGen2 [62]. Recently,
with the development of general-purpose LLMs, several
variants have been released specifically in handling code-
related tasks, such as CodeLlama [86], PaLM-Coder [60],
PanGu-Coder [58], PanGu-Coder2 [59].
Answer to RQ1.1: Overall, existing LLMs are mainly
developed along three directions, the encoder-decoder
represented by Google’s T5, the encoder-only repre-
sented by Microsoft’s BERT, and the decoder-only rep-
resented by OpenAI’s GPT. While different model ar-
chitectures excel in their own areas, it is challenging to
pinpoint a single best LLM for all tasks. For example,
encoder-only models (like BERT) focus on representing
input text and are typically not used for sequence gen-
eration tasks, while decoder-only models (like GPT) are
primarily used for generating sequences of text without
a separate encoding step.
3.2 RQ1.2: How are LLMs used in pre-training tasks?
In this section, we summarize some representative pre-
training tasks utilized to train LLMs of Code in the liter-
ature. Table 3 categorizes pre-training tasks into four major
classes, including code sequence modeling and prediction in
Section 3.2.1, bidirectional understanding and generation in
Section 3.2.2, code structure and relationship understanding
in Section 3.2.3 and cross-modal representation learning in
Section 3.2.4. Now, we list and summarize these pre-training
tasks as follows.
3.2.1 Code Sequence Modeling and Prediction
Such tasks involve predicting and completing code frag-
ments, such as masked spans or identifiers, so as to enhance
LLMS’ ability to understand and fill in missing parts of code.
Causal Language Modeling (CLM) . CLM 2 attempts to
predict the next most probable token in a sequence based on
the context provided by the previous tokens. Such a task has
usually been utilized to train decoder-only LLMs (e.g., Code-
Gen and CodeGPT) to generate complete programs from the
beginning to the end for supporting auto-regressive tasks,
such as code completion. For a sequence x = ( x1, . . . , xn)
with n tokens, the task is to predict the token xi given
previous tokens ( xj : j < i ). For example, CLM predicts
x for the given piece of incomplete code int add(int x,
int y) { return.
Masked Language Modeling (MLM) . MLM attempts
to predict the original masked word from an artificially
masked input sequence and is utilized in encoder-only
LLMs such as CodeBERT. Similar to the original BERT, 15%
of the code tokens from the input sequence are masked
out. As the prediction of masked tokens is made based on
the bidirectional contextual tokens, LLMs need to take into
account the tokens forward and backward from the masked
token in the input sequence. MLM is instrumental in train-
ing the model to comprehend not merely isolated code
tokens, but also the relationships between tokens within a
piece of code.
Masked Span Prediction (MSP) . MSP attempts to pre-
dict the masked code tokens in the input code snippet and
is utilized in encoder-decoder LLMs such as CodeT5. As
mentioned in CodeT5 [9], MSP randomly masks spans with
arbitrary lengths and then predicts these masked spans
combined with some sentinel tokens at the decoder. The
2. The training objective is called causal language modeling in LLMs
such as CodeGen2, but also referred to as next token prediction in LLMs
such as CodeGen, and unidirectional language modeling in LLMs such
as UniXcoder.

--- PDF PAGE 8 ---
8
input of LLMs is the original sequence, the mask sequence
is processed by the noise function, and the output is the
denoised sequence.
Masked Identifier Prediction (MIP) . Instead of ran-
domly masking spans like in MSP , MIP masks all identifiers
in the code snippet, using a unique sentinel token for each
different mask. Inspired by the insight that changing identi-
fier names does not impact code semantics, LLMs are tasked
to predict the original identifiers from the masked input in
an auto-regressive manner. MIP is a more challenging task
as it requires the model to comprehend the code semantics
based on obfuscated code and link the occurrences of the
same identifiers together.
Replaced Token Detection (RTD) . Originally proposed
by Clark et al. [87], RTD attempts to predict whether a word
is the original word or not, and is utilized in LLMs such as
CodeBERT. RTD replaces the original word at the location of
the mask with an alternative text, and perform a binary clas-
sification problem by training a discriminator to determine
if a word is the original one. The discriminator is trained
as a binary classifier to distinguish between original and
generated tokens. The process involves sampling alternative
tokens ˆwi from pGw(wi|wmasked) for positions i in mw,
and sampling alternative tokens ˆci from pGc(ci|cmasked)
for positions i in mc. Then, the corrupted input xcorrupt is
formed by replacing the masked words in w and c with
their corresponding alternatives. The RTD objective aims
to improve the efficiency of training by replacing masked
tokens with plausible alternatives, enabling the model to
benefit from both bimodal and unimodal data during the
learning process.
Modified Masked Sequence-to-Sequence (MASS) .
MASS attempts to reconstruct a sentence fragment by pre-
dicting the masked tokens in the encoder-decoder model
architectures and is utilized in LLMs such as SPT-Code.
Given a code snippet C, the modified version C u:v
origin is
obtained by masking the fragment from position u to v. The
model is pre-trained using this modified version to predict
the fragment of C from u to v As a result, the model learns
to predict masked parts of code sequences, enhancing its
ability to understand and generate complex code structures
accurately.
Span Denoising (SD) . SD involves randomly masking
a span of tokens in the input and then training the model
to reconstruct the original tokens, and is utilized in LLMs
such as CodeT5+. In the SD task, 15% of the tokens in the
encoder inputs are randomly replaced with indexed sentinel
tokens, and the decoder is required to recover these masked
tokens by generating a combination of spans. SD helps in
learning deeper contextual representations of code snippets,
enhancing LLMs’ understanding of language structure and
semantics. In CodeT5+, spans are sampled for masking,
where the span lengths are determined by a uniform dis-
tribution with a mean of 3, so as to avoid masking partial
words and enhance the model’s understanding of whole
words in the code.
3.2.2 Bidirectional Understanding and Generation between
Code and Natural Language
Such tasks involve the conversion and understanding be-
tween source code and natural language, including generat-
ing method names.
Bimodal Dual Generation (BDG) . BDG attempts to
perform bidirectional translation between PL and NL and is
utilized in LLMs such as CodeT5. Specifically, the NL- >PL
generation and PL->NL generation are treated as dual tasks,
and LLMs are optimized simultaneously on both tasks. For
each NL- >PL bimodal data point, two training instances
are created with reverse directions, and language identifiers
(e.g., <java> and <en> for Java PL and English NL,
respectively) are included. The main objective of BDG is
to enhance the alignment between the NL and PL, so as
to generate syntactically correct NL descriptions for code
snippets and code snippets for NL queries in downstream
tasks.
Method Name Generation (MNG) . MNG attempts to
leverage method names to enhance LLMs’ understand-
ing of code intent and functionality, and has been uti-
lized in LLMs such as SPT-Code. In the MNG task, the
model takes the input representation, denoted as Input =
C, [SEP], A, [SEP], N, where C is the code snippet, A is the
corresponding AST sequence, and N is a natural language.
3.2.3 Code Structure and Relationship Understanding
Such tasks usually involve understanding the structure and
relationships within source code, including the arrangement
of code elements and their connections.
Identifier Tagging (IT). IT attempts to make LLMs learn
whether a code token is an identifier or not and is utilized
in LLMs such as CodeT5 [9], which is inspired by the syntax
highlighting in some coding tools. IT can help LLMs to learn
the code syntax and the data flow structures of source code.
Edge Prediction (EP). EP attempts to learn representa-
tions from data flow in the context of code understanding
and is utilized in LLMs such as GraphCodeBERT [30]. The
primary motivation behind this task is to encourage the
model to learn structure-aware representations that capture
the relationships of ”where-the-value-comes-from” in the
code, thus enhancing its ability to comprehend code. In
this pre-training task, a graph representing the data flow
is constructed, where nodes represent variables or data
elements, and edges represent the flow of data between
these nodes. The objective is to predict the edges that are
masked (hidden) in the graph. To do this, approximately
20% of the nodes in the data flow graph are randomly
sampled, and the direct edges connecting these sampled
nodes are masked by adding an infinitely negative value
in the mask matrix.
Node Alignment (NA). Similar to EP , NA attempts to
align representations between source code and data flow,
and is utilized in LLMs such as GraphCodeBERT [30]. This
alignment helps the model better understand the relation-
ships between code tokens and nodes in the data flow, lead-
ing to improved comprehension of code semantics. In the
NA pre-training task, a graph is constructed representing
the data flow, and nodes in this graph represent variables
or data elements. Additionally, code tokens in the source
code are considered as another set of nodes. The objective
is to predict the edges between code tokens and nodes,
representing the alignment of variables in the code with
their data flow counterparts.

--- PDF PAGE 9 ---
9
Code-AST Prediction (CAP). Inspired by the NSP task,
CAP attempts to incorporate structural information of
source code into the pre-training input and is utilized in
LLMs such as SPT-Code [37]. The input of CAP includes
code and its corresponding abstract syntax tree (AST) rep-
resentation. The CAP task is formulated as a binarized
task that can be easily generated from any given code. In
constructing the input representation, the format used is as
[Input = C, [SEP], A, [SEP], N], where C represents the code
snippet, A represents the corresponding AST sequence, and
N is a natural language description.
3.2.4 Cross-modal Representation Learning
Such tasks involve understanding source code and other
modalities (such as comments) together, enhancing the
model’s capabilities in understanding and representing
code.
Multi-modal Contrastive Learning (MCL) . MCL at-
tempts to learn semantic embedding of code fragments by
distinguishing between positive and negative samples, and
has been utilized by LLMs such as UniXcoder [36]. The
positive sample refers to the same input but uses a different
hidden dropout mask, while the negative sample refers to
other representations in the batch. In UniXcoder [36], MCL
encodes the mapped AST sequence and then applies an
average pooling layer on the hidden state of the source input
to obtain semantic embedding.
Cross-modal Generation (CMG). CMG attempts to gen-
erate comments for code segments to aid LLMs in under-
standing the code semantics. The generation of the comment
is conditioned on the code, integrating semantic information
into the hidden states of code. Besides, to expose LLMs to
diverse contexts, a strategy is employed where the source
and target inputs are randomly swapped with a 50% proba-
bility.
Answer to RQ1.2: Overall, the recent trends of pre-
training tasks for Code LLMs reflect a significant shift
from early NLP-derived objectives towards more code-
aware objectives. Initially, LLMs are pre-trained with
language modeling objectives from NLP tasks, includ-
ing CLM for decoder-only LLMs (e.g., CodeGPT), MLM
for encoder-only LLMs ( e.g., CodeBERT), and MSP for
encoder-decoder LLMs ( e.g., CodeT5). The follow-up
works evolve to consider code variables and structural
features specifically, as well as cross-modal learning
for source code and natural language. This progression
signifies a continuous advancement towards LLMs that
not only process code as a sequence of tokens but deeply
understand its semantic and functional aspects, bridg-
ing the gap between source code and natural language.
3.3 RQ1.3: How are LLMs used in downstream tasks?
Once LLMs are trained on a vast corpus, it is critical to
evaluate the effectiveness and applicability of LLMs on
downstream tasks. Fine-tuning is the primary method for
transferring the knowledge acquired during pre-training to
downstream tasks, requiring LLMs to demonstrate code
understanding, reasoning, and generation capabilities. A
downstream task can be categorized by the task type ( i.e.,
code understanding and code generation) or data type ( i.e.,
code-code, code-text, text-code, and code-labels). We sum-
marize 15 representative downstream tasks that are evalu-
ated by existing LLMs in their original papers according to
a well-maintained repository3, detailed as follows.
Code-Code. Code-code tasks involve the process of
transforming one code snippet into another. For example,
code translation attempts to convert code from one pro-
gramming language into another while preserving its func-
tionality. This task has been adopted as a downstream task
in LLMs like CodeT5 [9], CodeBERT [8], and CodeT5 [9].
Code refinement (also known as program repair) attempts to
refine existing code that might contain errors, and has been
explored in LLMs like CodeT5 [9], GraphCodeBERT [30]
and SPT-Code [37]. Cloze test aims to predict a missing
token in a code snippet and has been adopted in LLMs like
CodeGPT [61]. Mutant generation attempts to generate mu-
tants by introducing small artificial faults, such as replacing
the + operator with -, and has been adopted in LLMs like
T5-learning [34]. Assert generation generates assert state-
ments to verify the correctness of programs and validate
certain assumptions, and has been adopted in LLMs, like
T5-learning [34].
Text-Code. Text-code tasks involve the process of trans-
forme human language descriptions into code snippets. For
example, Code generation attempts to directly produce code
snippets based on natural language descriptions, such as
docstrings. It has been widely adopted as a downstream
task in LLMs, including PyMT5 [33], CodeT5 [9], Codex [52].
Code search refers to the retrieval of relevant code samples
from a codebase that matches a given natural language
query, and haven been adopted in LLMs like CodeT5+ [41],
CodeGPT [51], UnixCoder [36] and SPT-Code [37].
Code-Text. Code-text tasks involve the process of trans-
forme code snippets into human language descriptions. For
example, code summarization is the task of automatically
generating a concise and accurate natural language descrip-
tion, or docstring, that encapsulates the actions and purpose
of a given source code snippet. It has been explored in
various LLMs, including CodeT5 [9], GraphCodeBERT [30],
PLBART [35], CodeGPT [51], UnixCoder [36], SPT-Code [37]
and ERNIE-Code [43].
Code-Label. Code-label tasks involve the process of
performing classifications of code snippets. For example,
clone detection identifies whether two code snippets are
functionally or semantically similar based on similarity
analysis and has been adopted in LLMs like CodeBERT [8],
CodeT5 [9] and CodeT5+ [41]. Defect detection predicts
whether a piece of source code contains bugs that could
potentially make software systems vulnerable to attacks and
has been adopted in LLMs like CodeT5 [9], PLBART [35],
and CodeGPT [51].
Answer to RQ1.3: Overall, as the direct applications of
LLMs, these downstream tasks can be categorized into
four classes according to input-output types, i.e., code-
code, code-test, test-code and code-labels, or into two
classes according to task types, i.e., code understand-
ing and code generation. We observe some trends in
3. https://microsoft.github.io/CodeXGLUE/

--- PDF PAGE 10 ---
10
a majority of existing downstream tasks where LLMs
can be directly applied. First, these tasks involve only
code snippets or the corresponding natural language
comments. Second, these tasks are usually evaluated au-
tomatically using well-designed metrics ( e.g., BLUE for
generation tasks and Accuracy for classification tasks),
thus supporting the large-scale evaluation benchmarks.
Third, these tasks can effectively reduce the program-
ming efforts of developers and can be integrated into
modern IDEs as plug-ins to aid programming. Finally,
these tasks have received attention and have been inves-
tigated in both the fields of SE and artificial intelligence.
LLMs have shown preliminarily promising results on
these tasks, importantly indicating their potential in a
wider and more in-depth range of SE tasks, detailed in
Section 4.
3.4 RQ1.4: How are LLMs open-sourced to support the
open science community?
Very recently, the literature has seen a surge in the appli-
cation of LLMs for a variety of SE problems. LLM brings
a fresh perspective on the challenges associated with code-
related tasks, shifting the focus from traditional learning-
based and rule-based approaches to a new pre-training-
and-fine-tuning paradigm. However, this shift also presents
unique reproducibility challenges, distinct from those in
traditional studies. For example, training complex LLMs
can require substantial computational resources, often ex-
ceeding what academic institutions and most businesses
can provide. Besides, the need for extensive data collection
and hyper-parameter tuning adds complexity and feasibil-
ity issues for replication. Given these challenges, there is
a growing imperative to adhere to open science princi-
ples in the LLM-driven SE field. Open science encourages
researchers to share their artifacts ( e.g., datasets, trained
models, scripts) with the broader research community, fos-
tering reproducibility and free knowledge exchange. While
numerous LLMs have been proposed for automating code-
related tasks with promising results, there is a need for
more support to address the critical issue of open science.
In particular, we investigate the extent to which LLMs make
their artifacts publicly available and how they provide this
information.
Among 62 investigated LLMs, 54 of them provide the
corresponding open-source repositories, which are summa-
rized in Table 4. For each LLM we collect, we check whether
an accessible link for its model or data is provided in the
main text or footnotes of the paper. We only present the
studies that provide the link of publicly available data or
tools due to limited space, listed in the first column. The
second column lists which hosting site the available artifact
is uploaded to for public access ( e.g., GitHub). The third
column lists whether the source code ( e.g., training scripts)
is available in the artifacts. The fourth column lists whether
the dataset ( e.g., raw data and training data) is available
in the artifacts. The fifth column lists whether the trained
model is available in the artifacts, and the sixth column lists
the corresponding site. We also list the accessible URL links
in the last column. After carefully checking the collected
papers, we find that 54 of 62 LLMs have made their artifacts
available to the public. Almost all studies upload their
artifacts on Github, which is the most popular platform
for hosting open-source code publicly. Similar to GitHub,
nearly all checkpoints of LLMs are hosted on Hugging
Face, with which developers can conveniently download
these trained models and conduct training or inference on
their own machines. Meanwhile, we find that several papers
fail to provide the source code, dataset, or already trained
models [41], perhaps due to commercial reasons.
Answer to RQ1.4: Overall, compared with traditional
DL studies, the need for high-quality artifacts in LLMs
is even more vital for replication and future research.
While numerous LLms have been introduced for code-
related tasks, there remains a significant gap in their
adherence to open science principles. On one hand,
abundant training time and expensive equipment ( e.g.,
GPUs) are required to train LLMs, making it much
harder to reproduce existing works. On the other hand,
some LLMs require complex environment settings ( e.g.,
the hyperparameters and the random seed) and high-
quality datasets. Therefore, we hope that researchers
can provide high-quality open-source code and detailed
instructions for convenient reproduction.
4 RQ2: SE P ERSPECTIVE
In this section, we summarize existing SE studies em-
powered with LLMs, which can be categorized into five
crucial phases within the SE life cycle, including software
requirements and design in Section 4.1, software develop-
ment in Section 4.2, software testing in Section 4.3, software
maintenance in Section 4.4, and software management in
Section 4.5. Each SE phase contains several distinct code-
related tasks, such as fault localization and program repair
in the software maintenance phase. Table 5 presents the
taxonomy of this section, categorizing 947 LLM-based SE
studies into 112 distinct SE tasks across five SE phases. More
detailed information about all specific studies is included in
Appendix B.
4.1 Software Requirements & Design
Software requirements refer to specific descriptions of con-
ditions or capabilities needed by users, systems, or sys-
tem components, typically presented in document form.
These requirements are categorized into functional and non-
functional requirements. The purpose of software require-
ments is to ensure that the developed software can meet
the expectations of users and relevant stakeholders, as well
as the conditions and capabilities specified in contracts,
standards, regulations, or other formal documents. Software
design involves the process of defining the structure, com-
ponents, functionalities, interfaces, and their relationships
within a software system. During the software design phase,
software engineers need to create detailed plans and design
blueprints based on software requirements and specifica-
tions to ensure that the software system can meet the users’
needs and expectations.

--- PDF PAGE 11 ---
11
TABLE 4: The Details of Code LLMs Availability
Model Hosting Site CA DA MA Model Site URL only for Public
CodeBERT GitHub Yes Yes Yes Hugging Face https://github.com/microsoft/CodeBERT
CuBERT GitHub Yes Yes Yes Google Cloud https://github.com/google-research/google-research
PyMT5 GitHub Yes Yes Yes PyPi https://github.com/devcartel/pymt5
CodeGPT GitHub No No Yes Hugging Face https://github.com/microsoft/CodeXGLUE
CodeT5 GitHub Yes Yes Yes Hugging Face https://github.com/salesforce/CodeT5
GraphCodeBERT GitHub Yes Yes Yes Hugging Face https://github.com/microsoft/CodeBERT
PLBART GitHub Yes Yes Yes Google Drive https://github.com/wasiahmad/PLBART
T5-Learning GitHub Yes Yes Yes Google Drive https://github.com/antonio-mastropaolo/T5-learning-ICSE2021
CodeRL GitHub Yes Yes Yes Google Cloud https://github.com/salesforce/CodeRL
CoditT5 GitHub Yes Yes Yes Hugging Face https://github.com/engineeringsoftware/coditt5
JuPyT5 GitHub No No No N.A. https://github.com/microsoft/DataScienceProblems
PolyCoder GitHub No Yes Yes Hugging Face https://github.com/VHellendoorn/Code-LMs
PyCodeGPT GitHub No Yes Yes Hugging Face https://github.com/microsoft/pycodegpt
SPT-Code GitHub Yes Yes Yes OneDrive https://github.com/NougatCA/SPT-Code
UnixCoder GitHub No Yes Yes Hugging Face https://github.com/microsoft/CodeBERT/tree/master/UniXcoder
Code Llama GitHub Yes No Yes Hugging Face https://github.com/facebookresearch/codellama
CodeFuse GitHub Yes No Yes Hugging Face https://github.com/codefuse-ai
CodeGen GitHub No Yes Yes Hugging Face https://github.com/salesforce/CodeGen
CodeGen2 GitHub No Yes Yes Hugging Face https://github.com/salesforce/CodeGen2
CodeT5+ GitHub No Yes Yes Hugging Face https://github.com/salesforce/CodeT5/tree/main/CodeT5%2B
ERNIE-Code GitHub Yes No No N.A. https://github.com/PaddlePaddle/PaddleNLP/
InCoder GitHub No Yes Yes Hugging Face https://sites.google.com/view/incoder-code-models
PPOCoder GitHub Yes Yes Yes N.A. https://github.com/reddy-lab-code-research/PPOCoder
RLTF GitHub Yes Yes Hugging Face https://github.com/Zyq-scut/RLTF
SantaCoder Hugging Face No Yes Yes Hugging Face https://huggingface.co/bigcode/santacoder
StarCoder GitHub No No No N.A. https://github.com/bigcode-project/starcoder
AlchemistCoder GitHub Yes Yes Yes Hugging Face https://github.com/InternLM/AlchemistCoder
AST-T5 GitHub Yes Yes Yes Hugging Face https://github.com/gonglinyuan/astt5
AutoCoder GitHub No No Yes Hugging Face https://github.com/bin123apple/AutoCoder
CodeGeeX GitHub No No Yes N.A. https://github.com/THUDM/CodeGeeX
CodeGemma Hugging Face No No No Hugging Face https://huggingface.co/blog/codegemma
CodeQwen1.5 GitHub No No Yes Hugging Face https://github.com/QwenLM/CodeQwen1.5
CodeSage GitHub Yes Yes Yes Hugging Face https://github.com/amazon-science/CodeSage
CoLSBERT GitHub Yes Yes Yes N.A. https://github.com/stanford-futuredata/ColBERT
DeepSeek-Coder GitHub Yes Yes Yes Hugging Face https://github.com/deepseek-ai/DeepSeek-Coder
DeepSeek-Coder-V2 GitHub No Yes Yes Hugging Face https://github.com/deepseek-ai/DeepSeek-Coder-V2
DolphCoder GitHub No No No N.A. https://github.com/pris-nlp/DolphCoder
CCT5 GitHub Yes No Yes Zenodo https://github.com/Ringbo/CCT5
BLOOM Hugging Face Yes Yes Yes Hugging Face https://huggingface.co/bigscience/bloom
CoLSBERT GitHub Yes Yes Yes N.A. https://github.com/stanford-futuredata/ColBERT
GrammarT5 GitHub Yes Yes Yes N.A. https://github.com/pkuzqh/GrammarT5
Granite GitHub No Yes Yes Hugging Face https://github.com/ibm-granite/granite-code-models
InverseCoder GitHub Yes Yes Yes Hugging Face https://github.com/wyt2000/InverseCoder
Lemur GitHub Yes Yes Yes Hugging Face https://github.com/OpenLemur/Lemur
Magicoder GitHub Yes Yes Yes Hugging Face https://github.com/ise-uiuc/magicoder
NT-Java Hugging Face No Yes Yes Hugging Face https://huggingface.co/infosys/NT-Java-1.1B
OctoCoder Hugging Face Yes Yes Yes Hugging Face https://huggingface.co/bigcode/octocoder
OctoGeeX Hugging Face Yes Yes Yes Hugging Face https://huggingface.co/bigcode/octocoder
StarCoder2 GitHub Yes Yes Yes Hugging Face https://github.com/bigcode-project/starcoder2
StepCoder GitHub No Yes No N.A. https://github.com/Ablustrund/APPSPlus
UniCoder GitHub Yes Yes Yes Google Drive https://github.com/microsoft/Unicoder
WaveCoder GitHub Yes Yes Yes Hugging Face https://github.com/microsoft/WaveCoder
WizardCoder GitHub Yes Yes Yes Hugging Face https://github.com/nlpxucan/WizardLM
XFT GitHub Yes Yes Yes N.A. https://github.com/ise-uiuc/xft
4.1.1 Software Specifications Generation
Software specifications generation refers to the automated
process of deriving formal descriptions and requirements
for software systems from unstructured data sources such
as comments or documentation within the software’s source
code. Traditional techniques for extracting software spec-
ifications usually involve rule-based or machine learning-
based methods that necessitate manual effort and domain
knowledge, and have limited the ability to generalize across
various domains.
LLMs provide a promising avenue for automating the
process of software specifications generation. LLMs, which
have been utilized successfully in numerous software engi-
neering tasks, offer the potential in automatically extract-
ing software specifications from textual information. For
example, Xie et al. [88] conduct the first empirical study to
assess the capabilities of LLMs for generating software spec-
ifications from software comments or documentation. They
employ few-shot learning techniques to enable LLMs to gen-
eralize from a limited number of examples and explore vari-
ous prompt construction strategies. This work also conducts
a comparative diagnosis of failure cases between LLMs and
traditional methods to identify their respective strengths
and weaknesses. Considering traditional methods relying
on pre-defined templates or grammar rules, SpecGen [89]
leverages the code comprehension capabilities of LLMs to
generate formal program specifications. SpecSyn [90] is a
specification synthesis approach that treats this task as a
sequence-to-sequence learning problem, directly translating
natural language input into formal specifications.

--- PDF PAGE 12 ---
12
TABLE 5: Distribution of SE tasks over five SE activities
SE Activity SE Task Total
Software Requirements
& Design (Section 4.1)
Ambiguity Detection (5) Requirement Prioritization (1)
43
Class Diagram Derivation (2) Requirement Summarization (1)
GUI Layouts (2) Requirement Traceability (2)
Requirement Classification (7) Requirements Quality Assurance (4)
Requirement Completeness Detection (1) Software Modeling (5)
Requirement Elicitation (7) Specification Generation (3)
Requirement Engineering (1) Specifications Repair (1)
Use Case Generation (1)
Software Development
(Section 4.2)
API Documentation Smells (1) Identifier Normalization (1)
341
API Inference (4) Microservice Recommendation (1)
API Recommendation (6) Neural Architecture Search (1)
Code Comment Completion (1) Program Synthesis (13)
Code Completion (34) SO Post Title Generation (2)
Code Compression (2) Type Inference (1)
Code Editing (5) Unified Development (1)
Code Generation (155) Code Recommendation (1)
Code Representation (6) Control Flow Graph Generation (2)
Code Search (19) Data Analysis (1)
Code Summarization (41) Method Name Generation (1)
Code Translation (24) Project Planning (1)
Code Understanding (12) SO Question Answering (2)
Continuous Development (1) Data Augmentation (2)
Software Testing
(Section 4.3)
Invariant Prediction (1) GUI Testing (6)
240
Proof Generation (1) Indirect Call Analysis (1)
Resource Leak Detection (1) Mutation Testing (12)
Taint Analysis (1) NLP Testing (7)
Vulnerability Detection (76) Penetration Testing (4)
Actionable Warning Identification (1) Program Analysis (1)
Adversarial Attack (3) Program Reduction (1)
API Misuse Detection (1) Property-based Testing (1)
API Testing (1) Simulation Testing (1)
Assertion Generation (10) Static Analysis (6)
Binary Code Similarity Detection (4) Static Warning Validating (2)
Code Execution (1) Test Generation (46)
Decompilation (8) Test Suite Minimization (1)
Failure-Inducing Testing (1) Dependency Alert Detection (1)
Fault Localization (17) Theorem Proving (1)
Fuzzing (18) Formal Verification (4)
Software Maintenance
(Section 4.4)
Android Permissions (1) APP Review Analysis (2)
211
Bug Report Detection (5) Code Clone Detection (10)
Bug Reproduction (4) Code Coverage Prediction (1)
Bug Triaging (3) Code Evolution (1)
Code Review (24) Code Refactoring (4)
Code Smells (1) Commit Message Generation (5)
Compiler Optimization (8) Debugging (1)
Exception Handling Recommendation (1) Flaky Test Prediction (1)
Incident Management (2) Log Analysis (20)
Issue Labeling (2) Mobile App Crash Detection (1)
Log Anomaly Detection (13) Outage Understanding (1)
Malware Tracker (1) Sentiment Analysis (4)
Patch Correctness Assessment (6) Tag Recommendation (1)
Privacy Policy (1) Technical Debt Management (1)
Program Repair (66) Test Update (3)
Report Severity Prediction (3) Traceability Link Recovery (1)
Vulnerability Repair (12)
Software Management
(Section 4.5)
Developers’ Behavior Analysis (1) Software Tool Configuration (1)
5Effort Estimation (2) Software Repository Mining (1)
4.1.2 Software Requirements Classification
Requirement classification refers to the process of cate-
gorizing software requirements into different classes or
types, such as functional and non-functional requirements.
Functional requirements outline the functionalities and be-
haviors the software should achieve, while non-functional
requirements cover broader system attributes such as per-
formance, security, reliability, and maintainability. As early
as 2020, Hey et al. [91] propose NoRBERT, a BERT-based
requirement classification approach for both functional and
non-functional classes by transfer learning. Khan et al. [92]
discuss the performance of LLMs in identifying and cate-
gorizing non-functional requirements. To address the issue
of limited annotated data in non-functional requirements
classification, Rahman et al. [93] propose to classify non-
functional requirements by extracting features from pre-
trained word embedding models. Considering that previous
work utilizing LLMs in a black-box manner, Han et al. [94]
propose a requirement classification approach based on
BERT and an explainable AI framework. They train a con-
cern extraction model to extract concerns from requirement
texts, and utilize explainability to generate explanations

--- PDF PAGE 13 ---
13
for the predictions of the requirement classification model,
which is then used to fine-tune BERT for requirement clas-
sification.
4.1.3 Requirement Quality Assurance
High-quality requirements are fundamental to the success
of software development, providing a clear and detailed
specification of what the software system should achieve.
To assess the quality of requirements, Lubos et al. [95]
empirically explores the effectiveness of LLMs (like Llama
2) to enhance the quality assurance process in the require-
ments engineering phase. Preda et al. [96] present an initial
study to automate the review of coverage between high-
level and low-level software requirements by GPT-3.5 and
GPT-4. Poudel et al. [97] utilize several BERT-style LLMs to
assess whether design elements adequately satisfy software
requirements. Ronanki et al. [98] utilizes ChatGPT to evalu-
ate the quality of user stories, which are crucial to capture
end-user needs and express requirements in agile software
development projects. These studies suggest that LLMs can
play a crucial role in automating and enhancing the quality
assurance processes across various aspects of requirements
engineering.
4.1.4 Software Specifications Repair
Software Specifications Repair refers to the process of fixing
errors in software specifications, which are formal declara-
tions of software system requirements or behaviors. This
repair process has become increasingly significant with the
growing complexity and usage of declarative languages like
Alloy. The recent integration of LLMs like ChatGPT in this
domain aims to automate and enhance the effectiveness
of repair techniques. These LLMs are evaluated for their
ability to correct inaccuracies in specifications and compared
against existing automated program repair methods. The
process involves identifying and rectifying various types of
errors in software specifications, including logical inconsis-
tencies, type errors, and misuse of programming constructs.
In 2023, Hasan et al. [99] evaluate the potential of ChatGPT
for repairing software specifications in the Alloy declar-
ative language. It aims to assess ChatGPT’s capabilities
in correcting errors and identifies challenges in making it
a viable solution. This work demonstrates that ChatGPT
successfully addresses unique errors that other tools fail to
rectify, although it does not consistently surpass them in
total repair count.
4.1.5 Requirement Ambiguity Detection
Ambiguities refer to terms or phrases in requirements
that can be interpreted in multiple ways, thus leading to
misunderstandings and inconsistencies during the devel-
opment process. Ambiguity detection attempts to identify
such unclear, vague, or imprecise statements early in the
requirements engineering phase. Moharil et al. [100], [101]
introduce TABASCO to detect ambiguities by leveraging
BERT to capture the different meanings a word can have
depending on its context within a requirement. Further,
Ezzini et al. [102] explore multiple approaches (such as
SpanBERT) to handle anaphoric ambiguity by ambiguity
detection and anaphora interpretation. Sridhara [103] con-
duct a preliminary empirical study to explore the potential
of ChatGPT in anaphora ambiguity resolution.
4.1.6 GUI Layouts
GUI layouts refer to the arrangement and organization of
various elements, such as widgets, images, banners, and
icons, within the design of a GUI. The purpose of GUI
layouts is to provide a user-friendly interface and ensure
a positive user experience. This encompasses how vari-
ous interface components are effectively positioned and
displayed to facilitate user understanding and interaction
with the application. Designing layouts involves consid-
erations of spatial relationships between elements, overall
page structure, usability, aesthetics, and other factors to
create an intuitive, user-friendly, and visually pleasing user
interface. Kolthoff et al. [104] fine-tune BERT to retrieve
reusable GUIs from a large-scale GUI repository, which can
be adapted to facilitate GUI prototyping. Besides, Wu et
al. [105] explore the application of LLMs in GUI layout
and introduce Instigator, which utilizes LLMs to search and
suggest GUI layouts based on textual instructions. Instigator
aims to enhance creativity and efficiency in the GUI design
process by providing designers with relevant and diverse
layout options. This work highlights the potential of LLMs
in supporting GUI design tasks, particularly by automating
parts of the creative process.
In addition to the above-mentioned tasks detailed above,
researchers also integrate LLMs into software require-
ments and design from other aspects, including class di-
agram derivation [106], requirement completeness detec-
tion [107], requirement elicitation [108], requirement prior-
itization [109], [110], requirement traceability [111], [112],
software modeling [113], [114] and use case generation [115].
4.2 Software Development
Software Development is a creative process involving the
use of computer programming languages, tools, and tech-
niques to transform user requirements, functionality, and
performance requirements into computer programs.
4.2.1 Code Generation
Code generation plays a pivotal role during software de-
velopment and has always been the primary focus in the
application of LLMs, such as AlphaCode [40] and Code-
Gen [54]. In general, recent advancements in LLM-based
code generation focus on requirement-guided generation,
execution-guided, and empirical studies. Below, we will
introduce these studies in detail.
Requirement-guided code generation. In the early
stages of development, LLMs commonly take a natural
language description as the input and return the correct
code snippet, which is evaluated by corresponding unit
tests [116], [117], [118]. For example, ArchCode [119] lever-
ages in-context learning to interpret software requirements
from textual descriptions for LLM-based code generation.
ClarifyGPT [120] attempts to detect ambiguous require-
ments, and prompt LLMs to specific clarifying questions,
which are used to refine the requirements and generate

--- PDF PAGE 14 ---
14
more accurate code solutions. Besides, AceCoder [121] di-
rects LLMs to analyze the given requirement and generate
intermediate artifacts for better code generation, such as
test cases, that help clarify the requirement. Inspired by the
way humans typically use planning to break down complex
problems, Jiang et al. [117] introduce a self-planning code
generation approach to help LLMs understand complex
intents and simplify problem-solving.
Execution-guided Code Generation. Inspired by the
process of human programming, developers utilize the ex-
ecution results to guide LLMs in refining generated code
iteratively [122], [123], [124]. For example, Self-Edit [125]
validates generated code with available test cases, and
the results are fed into LLMs as supplementary com-
ments for further improvements and corrections. Besides,
Dong et al. [126] introduce a self-collaboration code gen-
eration framework, which assembles a team consisting of
three ChaGPT roles ( i.e.,, analyst, coder and tester). Given
a requirement, the analyst decomposes it into several man-
ageable subtasks and develops a high-level plan. The coder
generates code according to the plan provided by the ana-
lyst, and refines code according to the test reports provided
by the tester. The tester receives the code generated by the
coder and subsequently produces a test report.
Empirical Evaluation of LLMs. A mass of empirical
studies are conducted to investigate the actual code gen-
eration capabilities of LLMs from different aspects, such as
robustness [127], [128], efficiency [129], human study [130],
[131], [132], ChatGPT [133], [134], prompt engineering [135],
benchmarks [136], [137], domain-specific generation [138]
For example, Mastropaolo et al. [127] conduct an empirical
study to investigate how robust GitHub Copilot is in gen-
erating consistent code when provided with semantically
equivalent natural language descriptions. Kou et al. [139]
empirically explore the attention alignment of LLMs and
human programmers during code generation.
Others. Recently, In addition to the above-mentioned
studies, there has been an exploration in cutting-edge ar-
eas such as repository-level generation [140], [141], [142],
retrieval-augmented generation [143] and agent-based gen-
eration [144], [145], [146]
4.2.2 Code Search
Code search is an essential practice in software development
where developers search for specific pieces of source code
within extensive codebases. Given a given query, this activ-
ity is undertaken to find code snippets, functions, classes,
or entire files for potential reuse. Overall, existing studies
utilizing LLMs for code search can be classified into two
categories. First, researchers utilize training objectiveness
to help LLMs learn more effective encoding representa-
tion, primarily focusing on contrastive learning [147], [148],
[149], [150]. For example, CodeRetriever [151] learns se-
mantic representations for function-level code search with
unimodal and bimodal contrastive learning. Unimodal con-
trastive learning encourages similar functional code to clus-
ter closely in the representation space, while bimodal con-
trastive learning assists in understanding the correlation be-
tween code and text. Similarly, CoCoSoDa [152] helps LLMs
better align code snippets and natural language queries for
code search based on multimodal contrastive learning and
data augmentation. Second, some empirical studies are con-
ducted to investigate the potential of LLMs in code search.
For example, Salza et al. [153] explore how transfer learning
can be applied to code search tasks by pre-training and fine-
tuning BERT. Chi et al. [154] evaluate exiting code search
LLMs in industry requirements based on their adaptability,
scalability, robustness, and semantic sensitivity.
4.2.3 Code Translation
Code translation refers to the process of converting code
from a source language into a target language while preserv-
ing the original functionality and behavior of the program.
This task is crucial in software development, especially
when developers want to migrate software systems to a dif-
ferent platform. Yang et al. [155] introduce UniTrans, which
introduces test case generation to enhance the accuracy
of code translation and provides mechanisms for iterative
repair of translation errors. TransMap [156] attempts to
detect semantic mistakes in code translated by models like
Codex and ChatGPT. Regarding empirical studies, Pan et
al. [157] propose a taxonomy of translation bugs introduced
by LLMs, while Jiao et al. [158] provide a detailed analysis
of code translation across four levels: token level, syntactic
level, library level, and algorithm level.
4.2.4 Code Co-Evolution
Code co-evolution attempts to update code snippets in
a target programming language by reflecting the changes
made in the source programming language. Different from
code translation that directly generates code snippets from
a source programming language to a target language, code
co-evolution learns an edit sequence to update existing code
snippets. Zhang et al. [159] propose Codeditor, which fine-
tunes CoditT5 to align the code edits for two programming
languages (Java and C#) from eight open-source projects.
4.2.5 Code Comment Completion
Code comment completion refers to the process by which
a computer program or model automatically writes code
comments for programmers. In this process, based on the
code that has already been written, the program or model
automatically generates corresponding comments to explain
the function and purpose of the code. It aims to provide
real-time suggestions and assistance to programmers while
writing code comments, similar to the concept of code
auto-completion. This process does not create comments
from scratch but rather assists programmers in completing
comments more quickly based on the partial comments or
code snippets they input. In 2021, Mastropaolo et al. [160]
address the issue of code comments using T5 and n-gram
models. The study compares a simple n-gram model and
the T5 model in supporting code comment completion. The
findings indicate that the T5 model performs better, al-
though the n-gram model remains competitive. The research
experiments with a dataset containing a large number of
Java methods and their associated comments. Results show
that the T5 model outperforms the n-gram model in all the
tested code comment completion scenarios.

--- PDF PAGE 15 ---
15
4.2.6 Code Summarization
Code summarization takes as input a code snippet provided
by the developer and automatically generates a higher-level
summary in natural language form. These summaries are
usually utilized to enhance the comprehension of software
systems, thereby facilitating their maintenance. Integrating
LLMs into code summarization can provide more accurate
and natural summaries of source code, as LLMs can lever-
age their general knowledge on vast amounts of textual
data to more accurately infer and generate natural language
summaries of source code.
Existing LLM-based studies mainly fall into three areas:
training optimizations, prompt engineering, and empirical
studies. First, for open-source LLMs, researchers utilize pre-
training or fine-tuning methods to enhance LLMs’ capa-
bilities of the alignment between code and natural lan-
guage [161]. For example, ESALE [162] introduce three three
code summarization-specific pre-training tasks (including
two general tasks ULM and MLM, and one domain-specific
task AWP) to help LLMs learn the code-summary align-
ment. Other training strategies include adapter tuning [163]
and joint training [161]. Second, for commercial LLMs,
prompt engineering is usually utilized to provide relevant
information in a zero-shot or few-shot manner [164], [165].
For example, Ahmed et al. [166] explores enhancing the code
summarization performance of LLMs by explicitly adding
semantic information to the prompts, such as parameter
names, return types, and simple control flows. Rukmono et
al. [167] integrate static code analysis into the chain-of-
thought prompting to generate component-level summaries
of software systems. Third, empirical studies are conducted
to explore the potential of LLMs from different aspects,
such as explainability [168], metrics [169], binary code sum-
marization [170] For example, Sun et al. [171] evaluate the
performance of ChatGPT on code summarization, and Li et
al. [168] utilize eye-tracking metrics from human partici-
pants to measure whether they concentrate the same parts
of code as LLMs when generating summaries.
4.2.7 Code Completion
Code completion aims at speeding up code writing by pre-
dicting the next code token the developer is likely to write.
Researchers usually focus on improving the accuracy of the
generated predictions. For example, TeCo [172] attempts to
generate the next statement in a test method by fine-tuning
CodeT5 with code semantic information. CCTEST [173]
focuses on improving the performance of off-the-shelf code
completion systems (such as Copilot and CodeGen) by uti-
lizing a mutation strategy to detect erroneous outputs and a
repair mechanism to fix these outputs, Besides, repository-
level code completion has always been challenging due to
complicated contexts from multiple files in the repository.
LLMs demonstrate the potential in this task by integrating
advanced strategies, such as information retrieval [174],
[175], [176], [177], static analysis [178], and reinforcement
learning [179]. There are also many empirical studies ana-
lyzing the actual performance of LLMs in code completion.
For example, Ciniselli et al. [180], [181] investigates the effec-
tiveness of T5 and RoBERTa for code completion at different
granularity levels, from single tokens to entire code blocks.
Similarly, Van et al. [182]explores the impact of contextual
information on three LLMs (UniXcoder, CodeGPT, and In-
Coder) for both token-level and line-level code completion.
4.2.8 Program Synthesis
Program synthesis refers to the automated process of gener-
ating computer programs based on high-level specifications
or requirements. The objective of this process is to automate
typically complex and time-consuming manual software
development tasks by allowing machines to generate code
based on specifications provided by users. The emphasis of
program synthesis is to enhance the capabilities of LLMs,
such as GPT-3 and Codex, enabling them to generate code
from natural language specifications of programmer intent.
For example, Jain et al. [183] from Microsoft explore the
integration of LLMs such as GPT-3, Codex, and Google’s
LLM in generating code from natural language descriptions
of programmer intent. Liventsev et al. [184] introduce SED,
a framework to enhance the program synthesis capabilities
of LLMs like OpenAI Codex. In SEIDR, a draft program
is first synthesized based on a high-level description and
is then executed to validate its correctness. If the program
fails, specific instructions are generated to guide LLMs in
fixing the issues until it meets the required specifications.
Besides, Vella et al. [185] explores the integration of multiple
LLMs within evolutionary algorithms to enhance program
synthesis tasks.
4.2.9 Code Editing
Code editing refers to the task of predicting changes or
modifications that need to be made to a piece of code to
transition from one version to another. It involves predicting
the edits a developer will make to refactor code from one
version (e.g., v1) to another version (e.g., v2 or v3). This
task is essential in software development, especially during
code refactoring or feature additions.
For example, Li et al. [186] design a pre-training spe-
cialized for code editing by rewriting mutated versions of
code snippets into their correct form. They then introduce
CodeEditor initialized with CodeT5 and fine-tune it on
two code editing scenarios, i.e., code-to-code editing and
comment&code-to-code editing. Besides, Gupta et al. [187]
propose Grace to address code editing by leveraging the
generative capabilities of LLMs on previously related edits.
By mirroring the behavior of developers, Li et al. [188]
introduce a hybrid approach SARGAM for automated code
editing, which consists of three steps. SARGAM first re-
trieves similar code patches from a large repository and uses
it to guide LLMs (such as PLBART, CoditT5, and NatGen) to
generate a new patch, which is further modified to fit the ex-
act context. These studies demonstrate the potential of LLMs
to automate complex editing tasks, offering developers an
efficient way to handle repetitive and time-consuming code
modifications.
In addition to the above-mentioned tasks detailed above,
researchers also integrate LLMs into software develop-
ment from other aspects, including API documentation
smells [189], API Inference [190], [191], [192], API rec-
ommendation [193], [194], [195], [196], [197], [198], code
compression [199], [200], code representation [201], [202],
[203], [148], [204], [205], code understanding [206], [207],

--- PDF PAGE 16 ---
16
[208], continuous development optimization [209], identifier
normalization [210], microservice recommendation [211],
neural architecture search [212], performance data synthe-
size [213], SO post title generation [214], type inference [215],
and unified development [216].
4.3 Software Testing
Software testing is the process of executing a program or
system with the intent of finding errors or any activity
aimed at evaluating an attribute or capability of a program
or system to ensure it meets its required results.
4.3.1 Fault Localization
Fault localization is a critical process in software engineering
that involves identifying the specific locations or elements
in a software system where faults or bugs are present.
By pinpointing the exact location of a fault, developers
can more quickly perform software debugging and bug-
fixing, leading to more efficient software development and
maintenance. In the literature, researchers have conducted
several studies to explore the performance of LLMs in fault
localization, where two types of LLMs are involved, i.e.,
encoder-like and GPT-like models.
Regarding encoder-based localization, as early as 2021,
Zhu et al. [217] propose TroBo, a CodeBERT-based cross-
project bug localization approach by leveraging both bug
reports and source code. In 2022, Ciborowska et al. [218]
discuss how to optimize BERT for changeset-based bug lo-
calization. They explore various design choices for applying
BERT, including how to encode code changes and match er-
ror reports to specific code changes to enhance accuracy. To
support cross-language cross-project bug localization, Chan-
dramohan et al. [219] fine-tune UniXcoder with a contrastive
learning object to enhance the representation of both bug
reports and source code. Regarding GPT-based localization,
Wu et al. [220] conduct a comprehensive empirical study on
the large-scale open-source program Defects4J, evaluating
the potential of OpenAI GPT LLMs ( i.e., ChatGPT-3.5 and
ChatGPT-4) in fault localization research. Besides, to handle
large codebases, Kang et al. [221] introduce AutoFL, to
select parts of the project and apply a post-processing step
to match ChatGPT’s answers with actual code elements.
Yang et al. [222] introduce LLMAO, the first CodeGen-
based approach that locates buggy lines without relying on
traditional test coverage information. FuseFL [223] leverages
ChatGPT to provide explainable fault localization by inte-
grating multiple sources of information, including test case
outcomes and code descriptions.
4.3.2 Code Decompilation
Decompilation is the reverse engineering process of ex-
tracting a binary executable’s code into a form that closely
resembles its original source code and is understandable to
humans. This task has important applications in security
fields, such as malware analysis and vulnerability detection,
as well as in software fields, such as code reuse and software
supply chain analysis.
There mainly exist two key challenges during the de-
compilation process, i.e., recovering variable names within
binary executable files and producing human-readable code.
To address the first issue, Xu et al. [224] introduce LmPa to
improve the recovery of variable names and other high-level
information by combining LLMs with program analysis.
LmPa utilizes LLMs to provide meaningful names for vari-
ables, which are then refined and validated with program
analysis techniques, ensuring that the recovered names are
contextually appropriate and semantically accurate. To ad-
dress the second issue, Wong et al. [225] automatically refine
the accuracy and quality of decompiled C code by combin-
ing LLMs with traditional decompilation techniques. LLMs
are utilized to fix syntax, inference, and memory errors in
decompiled output, making it compatible with standard
C/C++ compilation. A similar work is DeGPT[226], which
designs a three-role mechanism to maximize the optimiza-
tion capabilities of LLMs on decompiler output. Researchers
also make efforts to integrate LLMs into code decompilation
from different perspectives, including domain LLMs [227],
[228], [229], and WebAssembly [230], binary code under-
standing [231].
4.3.3 Vulnerability Detection
Vulnerability detection, also known as vulnerability predic-
tion, aims to identify potential security bugs in software
systems. Vulnerability detection is critical for protecting
security-critical software systems from malicious attacks,
providing the foundation for timely patching reported secu-
rity vulnerabilities before they may be exploited (discussed
in Section 4.4.2). In the literature, learning-based vulnerabil-
ity detection approaches [232], [233] have been proposed to
detect security vulnerabilities by extracting meaningful fea-
tures and performing predictions automatically. For exam-
ple, Li et al. [233] propose IVDetect, to perform fine-grained
vulnerability prediction based on a FA-GCN model and
GNNExplainer. However, such learning-based approaches
are limited by the amount of training data, resulting in
capturing a suboptimal vector representation of source code.
Thus, a mass of vulnerability detection approaches em-
powered with LLMs have been proposed. For example,
LineVul attempts to detect vulnerabilities at the line level
by fine-tuning CodeBERT and utilizing its attention mech-
anism to pinpoint vulnerable lines. In parallel to LineVul,
VulBERTa is an encoder-only Transformer-based vulnera-
bility detection approach by pre-training and fine-tuning
RoBERTa. Besides, VulLLM [234] utilizes multi-task instruc-
tion tuning to adapt LLMs in vulnerability detection, which
includes two auxiliary tasks: vulnerability localization to
pinpoint the specific vulnerable parts of the code, and
vulnerability interpretation to understand the underlying
issues. GPTScan [235] attempts to detect smart contract logic
vulnerabilities by combining GPT and static analysis. In the
literature, researchers also conduct some empirical studies.
For example, Steenhoek et al. [236] conduct an empirical
study to investigate the performance of DL models in
detecting software vulnerabilities from three aspects, i.e.,
model capabilities, training data, and model interpretation.
This study includes nine learning-based AVD approaches,
including the above-mentioned two LLM-based approaches,
i.e., LineVul and VulBERTa, and two off-the-shelf LLMs,
i.e., CodeBERT and PLBART. In 2023, Zhang et al. [237]
explore the performance of ChatGPT in software vulnerabil-
ity detection with different prompts. Meanwhile, Noever et

--- PDF PAGE 17 ---
17
al. [238] evaluate the capabilities of LLMs, particularly GPT-
4, in detecting software vulnerabilities, comparing their
performance against traditional static code analysis tools.
4.3.4 Unit Test Generation
Test generation is the process of creating a set of test data
or test cases for testing the adequacy of new or revised
software programs. Unit test generation is a specialized do-
main within test generation, focusing on creating test cases
for individual code units. We summarize these advanced
studies that employ LLMs as follows.
Fine-tuning LLM-based Generation. AthenaTest rep-
resents the first work to apply LLMs in the field of test
generation. AthenaTest first pre-trains BART on a large
corpus of English and Java datasets and fine-tunes it on a
labeled Java dataset. A3Test [239] first pre-trains PLBART
to learn assertion knowledge in a self-supervision manner
and fine-tune it to support the test case generation task.
Rao et al. [240] introduce CAT-LM, a GPT-style LLM that
is specifically trained to learn the mapping between code
and its corresponding test cases.
Prompt-based Generation. For example, Schafer et
al. [241] introduce TestPilot, an LLM-based end-to-end adap-
tive test generation technique for JavaScript. TestPilot first
constructs a prompt with the information of the function
under test and its usage examples. TestPilot then queries
LLMs to generate test cases, which are validated through
dynamic execution, and refined with new prompts con-
taining failure information. MuTAP [242] utilizes mutation
testing to augment the prompts, guiding LLMs to generate
test cases that can detect software bugs. SymPrompt [243]
enhances the performance of LLMs in generating high-
coverage test cases by utilizing code-aware prompts, which
are dynamically constructed with the execution paths of the
method under test. Pizzorno et al. [244] introduce CoverUp,
which integrates coverage analysis into prompts to itera-
tively generate Python regression tests.
Conversation-driven Generation with ChatGPT. To ad-
dress issues of invalid test cases and low coverage, Gu et
al. [245] introduce ChatGPT-based TestART, which inte-
grates test generation with an iterative template-based re-
pair process. To mitigate common issues such as invalid or
incomplete tests generated by LLMs, Karmarkar et al. [246]
introduce TestRefineGen to generate tests based on textual
descriptions while ensuring confidentiality is maintained.
Xie et al. [247] propose ChatUniTest, an automated unit test
generation tool based on ChatGPT under the generation-
validation-repair framework. Ni et al. [248] introduce Cas-
ModaTest, an end-to-end LLM-based framework, by divid-
ing the unit test generation task into two cascaded ones:
test prefix generation and test oracle generation. To enhance
test coverage and improve the efficiency and effectiveness
of automated testing, Lemieux et al. [249] introduce CO-
DAMOSA, which integrates Codex with SBST to generate
Python test cases.
Empirical Evaluations of LLM-based Test Generation.
Xiao et al. [250] empirically explore how LLMs can be
integrated into traditional search-based unit test generation
workflows, including the initial phase, the test generation
period, and the test coverage plateaus. Tang et al. [251]
provide a comprehensive comparison between ChatGPT
and EvoSuite based on several factors: correctness, read-
ability, code coverage, and bug detection capabilities. Sim-
ilarly, Yang et al. [252] explore the impact of prompt de-
signs, comparison of open-source and commercial LLMs,
and in-context learning. Researchers also conduct more
studies from different aspects, such as the investigation
of ChatGPT [253], [254], prompt engineering [255], human
study [256], GUI text Input [257], security tests [258]
4.3.5 Assertion Generation
Assertion Generation refers to the process of automati-
cally inferring or creating expected outcomes or conditions
against which the output of a software system or pro-
gram is validated. These oracles serve as a standard or
benchmark against which the system’s behavior is tested,
allowing for the automatic detection of bugs, discrepancies,
or unexpected behaviors within the software. It involves
using various methods, ranging from hard-coded patterns,
natural language processing, neural networks, and machine
learning models to derive or predict the expected outcomes,
assertions, or exceptional behaviors of a given code snippet,
function, or method. The goal is to generate these oracles
accurately to enable automated testing and the identification
of potential flaws or issues within the software.
As early as in 2022, Tufanoet al. [259] propose to leverage
the BART model to generate accurate assert statements in
unit test cases. They first perform semi-supervised pre-
training on a large corpus of English text to help BART learn
the semantic and statistical properties of natural language.
They then pre-train BART on abundant Java source code
crawled from GitHub with a similar pre-training strategy to
English pre-training. Finally, they fine-tune it on a dataset
mined from more than 9 thousand open-source GitHub
projects containing unit test cases defined with JUnit. De-
spite promising, the previous approach [259] struggles to
find real-world bugs. In 2022, Dinella et al. [260] propose a
transformer-based approach TOGA to infer both exceptional
and assertion test oracles based on the context of the focal
method. TOGA fine-tunes CodeBERT to classify exceptional
oracles and rank assertion oracles. Unlike previous studies
fine-tuning LLMs for assertion generation, Nashid et al. [17]
introduce Cedar, a few-shot learning method that utilizes a
prompt-based approach for both test assertion generation
and program repair. Cedar retrieves relevant demonstra-
tions and conducts prompts to query Codex to generate
assertions in a few-shot manner.
Regarding empirical studies and benchmarking, He et
al. [261] investigate the effectiveness of seven test-to-code
traceability techniques in assertion generation and enhance
existing datasets for training and evaluating assertion gen-
eration models, such as T5. besides, Pulavarthi et al. [262]
introduce AssertionBench, a benchmark to assess the ef-
fectiveness of LLMs in generating assertions for hardware
verification. AssertionBench focuses on generating high-
quality assertions, which are crucial for detecting and di-
agnosing design bugs, particularly in complex hardware
systems. Endres et al. [263] explore the potential of LLMs,
such as GPT-4, to convert informal natural language de-
scriptions of program behavior into formal postconditions
that can be used for software verification. Hossain et
al. [264] conduct a large-scale investigation of the ability

--- PDF PAGE 18 ---
18
of LLMs to automatically generate test oracles by fine-
tuning LLMs (including CodeGPT-110M, CodeParrot-110M,
CodeGen-350M, PolyCoder-4B, Phi-1-1.3B, CodeGen-2B and
PolyCoder-2.7B) with six different prompts.
4.3.6 Test Suite Minimization
Test suite minimization aims at improving the efficiency
of software testing by removing redundant test cases, thus
reducing testing time and resources while maintaining the
effectiveness of the test suite. Since previous test suite
minimization approaches that rely on test code (black-box)
are rather time-consuming, Pan et al. [265] propose LTM, a
black-box similarity-based approach that leverages LLM to
address the scalability problem. They explore three off-the-
shelf pre-trained models for similarity measurements: Code-
BERT, GraphCodeBERT and UniXcoder. These models take
the source code of test cases as input to generate numeric
vectors. Then, they employ two similarity measures for
calculating the similarity between test method embeddings:
Cosine Similarity and Euclidean Distance. Cosine similarity
measures the angle between two vectors, whereas Euclidean
distance calculates the straight-line distance between them.
Results show that UniXcoder/Cosine is the best LTM config-
uration when considering both effectiveness and efficiency.
Besides, LTM outperforms prior works by achieving a sig-
nificantly higher fault detection rate and faster minimization
time.
4.3.7 Fuzzing
Fuzzing is an automated software testing method that in-
jects invalid, malformed, or unexpected inputs into a system
to reveal software defects and vulnerabilities. A fuzzing tool
injects these inputs into the system and then monitors for
exceptions such as crashes or information leakage. In the
following, we summarize and categorize existing fuzzing
studies empowered with LLMs.
DL Library Fuzzing . DL libraries, such as TensorFlow
and PyTorch, are foundational to the burgeoning field of DL,
play a pivotal role in our daily lives due to the widespread
adoption of DL systems. Traditional fuzzing techniques
often struggle to satisfy both the input language semantics
and the DL API input constraints for tensor computations.
To address this, Denget al. [266] introduce TitanFuzz in 2023,
the first approach to leverage LLMs directly for generating
input programs for fuzzing DL libraries. For any given
target API, TitanFuzz initially uses an LLM to generate a
list of high-quality seed programs for fuzzing by querying
the Codex model with a step-by-step prompt and sampling
multiple completions. However, due to the nature of LLMs,
TitanFuzz tends to generate ordinary human-like DL pro-
grams, which can only cover a limited range of program
patterns. Deng et al. [267] propose FuzzGPT, which utilizes
LLMs to generate unusual programs based on historically
bug-triggering programs. FuzzGPT features three variants:
few-shot learning, zero-shot learning, and fine-tuning, lever-
aging different LLMs, including Codex and CodeGen. Ad-
ditionally, FuzzGPT can utilize the directive-following capa-
bilities of ChatGPT to generate atypical programs.
Compiler Fuzzing Compilers are the foundation of mod-
ern software systems by translating high-level source code
written by programmers into machine code, a lower-level
language that a computer can execute. Thus, the correctness
of a compiler is crucial as it ensures the accurate and efficient
execution of the intended functionality of the software. In
2023, Yang et al. [268] introduce WhiteFox, the first white-
box compiler fuzzing tool using LLMs in conjunction with
source code information to test compiler optimizations.
WhiteFox utilizes a dual-model framework, where one
analysis LLM examines low-level optimization source code
and generates high-level test program requirements that
can trigger optimizations, while another generation LLM
produces test programs based on the summarized require-
ments. Eom et al. [269] introduce CovRL, a novel approach
for fuzzing JavaScript engines by integrating coverage-
guided reinforcement learning with LLMs. CovRL leverages
coverage feedback to guide the mutation process, aiming to
uncover vulnerabilities more efficiently while minimizing
syntax and semantic errors.
Protocol Fuzzing . Protocol implementations are the
practical realizations of communication protocols in soft-
ware or hardware, where correctness is crucial to ensure
reliable and secure data transmission across different sys-
tems and networks. In 2023, Meng et al. [270] explore the
opportunity of interacting with LLMs, which have ingested
millions of pages of human-readable protocol specifications,
to extract machine-readable information about the protocol
for use in protocol fuzz testing. They develop CHATAFL,
an LLM-guided protocol implementation fuzzing engine,
to achieve structure-aware mutations concerning the state
machine and input structure of the protocol. To fuzz Internet
of Things (IoT) devices, LLMIF [271] utilizes an LLM to
analyze protocol specifications and generate relevant test
cases.
General-purpose Fuzzing. Different from previous stud-
ies targeting specific scenarios, general-purpose fuzzing
(e.g., AFL ) is unaware of the programs and focuses on
byte-level transformations. In 2023, Xia et al. [272] intro-
duce Fuzz4All, the first universal fuzzer to support various
software systems based on the multi-lingual capabilities
of LLMs. It utilizes auto-prompting techniques to generate
effective LLM prompts for fuzzing and iteratively updates
prompts to generate diversified fuzzy inputs. Fuzz4All has
been evaluated on nine systems across six different lan-
guages ( i.e., C, C++, SMT, Go, Java, and Python), demon-
strating a significant improvement in code coverage com-
pared to previous fuzzers. Besides, considering that tradi-
tional fuzzers ( e.g., AFL) struggle to generate structured
test inputs efficiently and at scale, in 2023, Hu et al. [273]
introduce CHATFUZZ, a grey-box fuzzing tool leveraging
ChatGPT to enhance test input quality and effectiveness.
In parallel to CHATFUZZ, Dakhama et al. [274] introduce
an innovative approach that combines LLM and search-
based fuzzing, specifically targeting the gem5 system. The
technique leverages ChatGPT to parameterize C programs,
compiles the resulting code snippets, and feeds them to
the SearchGEM5 extension of the AFL++ fuzzer, utilizing
custom mutation operators. Similarly, LLAMAFUZZ [275]
attempts to enhance traditional greybox fuzzing by lever-
aging LLMs to generate structured data, which is often
a challenge for traditional fuzzing methods that rely on
random mutations.
Fuzz Driver Generation. A fuzz driver is a piece of code

--- PDF PAGE 19 ---
19
written to accept inputs from fuzzers and execute the pro-
gram accordingly. It is labor-intensive and time-consuming
for human experts to manually write high-quality fuzz
drivers. In 2023, Zhang et al. [276] conduct an empirical
study to explore the fundamental issues of effective fuzz
driver generation using LLMs. This framework includes a
quiz with 86 driver generation questions collected from 30
popular C projects and a set of criteria for precise driver
effectiveness validation. In total, 189,628 fuzz drivers using
0.22 billion tokens are generated and evaluated. The re-
search results indicate that enhanced query strategies and
iterative methods can significantly improve the accuracy
and efficiency of generating fuzz drivers.
Others. Researchers also integrate LLMs into other
fuzzing scenarios, including smart contracts [277], kernel
fuzzing [278], and BusyBox [279]. For example, Oliinyk et
al. [279] utilize LLMs to generate initial test seeds for
fuzzing BusyBox, a widely-used open-source software suite
for Linux-based embedded devices, aligning these seeds
more closely with the expected inputs of BusyBox’s various
utilities.
4.3.8 Penetration Testing
Penetration Testing refers to the systematic process of ac-
tively assessing an organization’s, company’s, or system’s
security defenses by simulating real-world cyberattacks.
This method involves identifying potential vulnerabilities
and testing the system’s resilience against exploitation,
thereby providing insights into the system’s security gaps
and weaknesses. PentestGPT [280] is an LLM-empowered
automatic penetration testing tool that leverages the abun-
dant domain knowledge inherent in LLMs. PentestGPT
consists of three core modules: (1) the reasoning module
maintains a high-level overview of the testing process; (2)
the generation module translates specific sub-tasks from
the reasoning module into concrete instructions; and (3)the
parsing module operates as a supportive interface between
the user and the other two core modules. PTGroup [281] au-
tomates complex penetration testing scenarios by utilizing
LLMs to interpret multiple testing strategies simultaneously
and designing multiple prompt chains for different penetra-
tion testing tasks. Meanwhile, Happe et al. [282] explores the
use of LLMs like GPT-3.5 to enhance penetration testing,
focusing on both high-level task planning and low-level
attack execution.
4.3.9 Property-based Testing
Property-based testing (PBT) aims to verify whether the
program properties are satisfied by generating a large num-
ber of random input data. In comparison to traditional
unit testing, PBT emphasizes the program’s properties and
behaviors rather than singular predefined test cases. This
testing method was initially popularized by the QuickCheck
library in the Haskell language. The main steps of PBT
include property definition, random data generation, and
property validation.
Traditional PBT methods are not widely applied in ac-
tual software development because crafting diverse random
input generators and meaningful test properties poses a
challenge. However, developers tend to be more inclined
towards documentation writing, and library API documen-
tation contains valuable natural language specifications for
PBT. Vikram et al. [283] propose PBT-GPT, utilizing LLM
to generate random inputs and test properties from API
documentation. This study explores three different LLM
prompting strategies, revealing various failure modes in
PBT-GPT and outlining an evaluation methodology for gen-
erator and property quality. Preliminary research reports
the results of using PBT-GPT on three Python library APIs.
The experimental findings demonstrate the design and eval-
uation framework of PBT-GPT. In the design phase, re-
searchers introduce three distinct LLM prompting strategies
to generate critical components of property-based tests. The
evaluation section thoroughly analyzes the quality of the
generated generators and properties, encompassing metrics
such as validity, diversity, and strength. Additionally, strate-
gies to address potential issues are presented, providing
effective pathways for enhancing test quality. Overall, the
experimental results offer valuable insights into synthesiz-
ing property-based tests using LLM, despite some quality
issues. The proposed mitigation strategies and evaluation
framework pave the way for subsequent enhancements and
improvements.
4.3.10 Failure-Inducing Testing
Failure-inducing testing (FIT) is a software testing approach
aimed at identifying test cases that can trigger software
errors or faults. This method employs test inputs to provoke
specific behaviors or anomalies within a program, thereby
detecting and addressing errors in software.
For example, Li et al. [284] propose Differential Prompt-
ing, a methodology that utilizes ChatGPT to infer pro-
gram intentions, generate program versions, and conduct
differential testing, effectively identifying test cases that
trigger software errors. The research finds that ChatGPT’s
ability to infer program intentions enables it to bypass
subtle differences in code, thus identifying the correct pro-
gram intention. By leveraging this characteristic, Differential
Prompting successfully identifies test cases that trigger soft-
ware errors. Differential Prompting comprises three main
steps: program intention inference, program generation, and
differential testing. In experiments conducted on different
program sets such as QuixBugs and Codeforces, Differential
Prompting demonstrates significant advantages in identi-
fying failure-inducing test cases, far surpassing existing
baseline methods.
4.3.11 Mutation Testing
Mutation testing represents an established fault-based test-
ing technique. It introduces faults into the programs under
examination and requires developers to write tests that
uncover these faults. These tests possess the potential to
reveal numerous faults, particularly those associated with
the introduced faults.
In particular, µBERT [285] represents the first attempt to
integrate LLMs into mutation testing by using CodeBERT
to generate natural mutants. Unlike traditional mutation
testing methods, µBERT does not rely on predefined syn-
tactic transformation rules. Instead, it masks tokens in the
input expression and utilizes CodeBERT to predict and gen-
erate mutants. Inspired by µBERT, Ibrahimzada et al. [286]

--- PDF PAGE 20 ---
20
propose BugFarm to transform arbitrary code into com-
plex bugs by querying LLMs to mutate code in multiple
locations. VULGEN [287] focuses on generating realistic
software vulnerabilities by combining pattern mining with
LLMs. It first collects vulnerability-fixing examples to mine
the patterns for vulnerability injection, and then leverages
CodeT5 to learn the localization of injection. Similarly,
Garg[288] investigates the relationship between software
vulnerabilities and mutants generated by CodeBERT.
Regarding empirical studies, Wan et al. [289] investigate
the performance of LLMs in generating mutations based on
various criteria, including usability, fault detection potential,
and their relationship with real bugs. Geng et al. [164]
empirically investigates the feasibility of utilizing LLMs to
generate comments that can reflect multiple developer in-
tents by in-context learning. Besides, Tian et al. [290] explore
the the effectiveness and efficiency of LLMs in detecting
equivalent mutants.
4.3.12 GUI Testing
Graphical user interface (GUI) testing ensures the accuracy
and reliability of a mobile application’s visual interface. It
involves verifying that interactions with components like
buttons and text boxes yield expected outcomes. The aim
is to confirm the correct information display and intended
user interactions. GUI testing can be manual or automated,
often using metrics like error detection and code coverage
for assessing performance. Its primary goal is to guarantee
the stability and reliability of an application’s visual and
interactive elements.
In 2022, to recognize the diverse and semantic require-
ments for valid inputs in GUI testing, Liuet al. [291] propose
an approach named QTypist based on LLMs for intelligently
generating semantic input text according to the GUI context.
To boost the performance of LLMs on text input in mobile
GUI, they develop a prompt-based data construction and
tuning method to automatically extract the prompts and
answers for model tuning. They leverage the pre-trained
GPT-3 model and fine-tune it with the tuning method.
For GUI testing, a context-aware input generation method
generates the prompt and feeds it into the GPT-3 model.
Unlike QTypist [291] focusing on text input generation, in
2023, Liu et al. [292] propose GPTDroid, framing the mobile
GUI testing problem as a question-answering task, utilizing
LLM as a human tester. GPTDroid facilitates the passing
of the application’s GUI information to LLM to initiate
testing scripts and receive and iterate execution results.
This framework incorporates a functionality-aware memory
prompting mechanism, equipping the LLM to retain testing
knowledge and engage in long-term, functionality-based
reasoning to guide exploration. Besides, VisionDroid [293] is
a vision-driven automated GUI testing approach that lever-
ages multimodal LLMs that can understand both visual and
textual information to detect non-crash functional bugs in
mobile apps. DroidAgent [294] leverages LLMs to simulate
user interactions by setting and executing tasks that mirror
realistic user behaviors and intents.
4.3.13 NLP Testing
NLP testing refers to the process of assessing and evalu-
ating the performance, accuracy, and robustness of natural
language processing systems, including but not limited to
machine translation, text generation, language understand-
ing, and other NLP-related tasks. As early as 2020, He et
al. [295] introduce SIT, a metamorphic testing approach that
leverages BERT to validate machine translation software.
SIT uses BERT to generate a set of similar sentences by
altering a single word in the source sentence, helping to
assess the structural consistency of translations. Similarly,
motivated by the idea that sentences with distinct meanings
should yield different translations, Guptaet al. [296] propose
PatInv, which generates syntactically similar but semanti-
cally different sentences using BERT. In 2022, Sun et al. [297]
introduce CAT, a BERT-driven word-replacement method
for enhancing machine translation. Beyond these studies on
machine translation, researchers have also explored using
LLMs, particularly BERT, in other NLP testing scenarios,
including named entity recognition software [298], textual
content moderation software [299], dialogue systems [300],
and question answering systems [301].
In addition to the above-mentioned tasks detailed above,
researchers also integrate LLMs into software testing from
other aspects, including API testing [302], code execu-
tion [303], static analysis [304], [305], [306], [307], vulnerable
dependency alert detection [308] theorem proving [309], DL
adversarial attack [310] and program reduction [311].
4.4 Software Maintenance
Software maintenance is one of the foundational aspects of
software engineering and encompasses the ongoing process
of post-delivery software modification, aiming to rectify
errors and meet emerging requirements.
4.4.1 Program Repair
Automated program repair aims to generate correct patches
for a detected buggy code snippet automatically and plays
a crucial role during software maintenance [312], [313],
[314]. A typical repair technique usually contains three
steps: (1) applying off-the-shelf fault localization techniques
to recognize the suspicious code elements; (2) modifying
these elements based on a set of transformation rules to
generate candidate patches; (3) adopting test suites to verify
all candidate patches.
Overall, we summarize the existing program repair work
involving LLMs into five stages. Initially, program repair is
directly used as a downstream task to evaluate the capabil-
ity of LLMs when such LLMs are designed and proposed
in their original paper, such as CodeT5 and CodeBERT.
Subsequently, there exist explorations in the SE field using
LLMs as a component in existing repair workflow, such
as CURE. Then comes the fine-tuning of LLMs as repair
models on historical bug-fixing datasets, which is also the
most widely researched topic in the literature. Later, zero-
shot learning is utilized to better leverage LLMs, which also
indicates a shift in the repair paradigm, i.e., from an NMT
task to a close test task in a fill-in-the-blank format. Recently,
there have been attempts to combine LLMs with traditional
repair techniques to address inherent problems that are
difficult for traditional techniques to solve. At the same time,
there is a substantial amount of empirical research in the
field exploring the actual performances of LLMs in program

--- PDF PAGE 21 ---
21
repair. Now, we list and summarize the existing LLM-based
repair techniques as follows.
Repair as a downstream task of LLMs. Since the in-
ception of LLMs, some researchers usually employ pro-
gram repair as a downstream task (also referred to as code
refinement) to evaluate the models’ capabilities. In this
scenario, program repair is viewed as a general code-code
generation task, which translates the buggy code snippet to
a correct code snippet on top of natural machine translation.
The preliminary evaluations demonstrate the remarkable
performance of LLMs in understanding code semantics
and learning bug-fixing code changes, as well as fostering
subsequent, deeper work introducing such LLMs into the
field of program repair.
TABLE 6: The comparison results of representative LLMs on
program repair
BFP-Small BFP-Medium
Model BLEU Accuracy BLEU Accuracy
CodeBERTER 78.26% 17.75% N.A. N.A.
CodeT5 77.43% 21.62% 87.64% 13.96%
CodeBERT 77.42% 16.40% 91.07% 5.16%
GraphCodeBERT 80.02% 17.30% 91.31% 0.09%
PLBART 77.02% 19.21% 88.50% 8.98%
RoBERTa 77.30% 15.90% 90.07% 4.10%
LLM as a Repair Component. In the SE domain, the ear-
liest exploration is to use LLMs to enhance certain aspects of
existing traditional repair techniques. For example, in 2021,
on top of CoCoNut, Jiang et al. [315] propose a new NMT-
based APR technique CURE empowered with GPT. First,
CURE extracts millions of methods from open-source Java
projects and use subword tokenization to tokenize these
methods. Second, CURE pre-trains GPT on the extracted
dataset and fine-tunes it on CoCoNuT’s training dataset.
Third, CURE applies a new code-aware beam-search strat-
egy to improve patch ranking and generate more correct
patches. Finally, CURE combines the fine-tuned GPT with
CoCoNuT as the full APR pipeline and trains it for the patch
generation task. Importantly, it demonstrates the unique
capabilities of combining a GPT PL model and an NMT
model to learn both developer-like code and fix patterns to
fix more bugs. Besides, in 2022, Li et al. [316] propose DEAR,
a learning-based APR for multi-hunk, multi-statement bugs
empowered with BERT. DEAR fine-tunes BERT to learn the
fixing-together relationships among statements,i.e., whether
two statements are needed to be fixed together.
Fine-tuning LLMs as Repairers. Inspired by the suc-
cessful application of program repair as a downstream
task for LLMs, more research has delved into exploring
the performance of fine-tuning such models in the repair
domain [317]. For example, DeepDebug [318] is an early-
stage work that views program repair as a Seq2Seq learning
task by fine-tuning BART on Java datasets. At the same
time, Berabi et al. [319] present TFix, which fine-tunes T5
to fix JavaScript code errors. To support multilingual repair,
in 2022, Yuan et al. [16] propose CIRCLE, a T5-based APR
framework equipped with continual learning ability across
multiple programming languages. Recently, some studies
utilize parameter-efficient fine-tuning to reduce training
costs [320], [321].
Zero-shot LLM-based Repair. Despite promising, the re-
pair performance of fine-tuned LLMs is usually constrained
by the quality and quantity of labeled bug-fixing pairs, sim-
ilar to previous learning-based repair techniques. Therefore,
some researchers attempt to transform the repair problem
into a cloze test task under a zero-shot setting, where LLMs
are queried to directly predict the correct code tokens based
on context information ( i.e., buggy methods) without any
fine-tuning on historical datasets. For example, Xia et al. [13]
propose AlphaRepair as the first cloze-style APR approach
that leverages LLMs without any fine-tuning. AlphaRepair
replaces the entire buggy line with a line containing only
mask tokens and queries CodeBERT to generate candidate
patches. Repilot [322] utilizes a Java completion engine to
offer real-time feedback during the auto-regressive token
generation process, thus assisting LLMs in producing better
patches. FitRepair seeks to enhance the performance of
cloze-style APR by combining LLMs and domain repair
knowledge.
Combination of LLMs and traditional APR. Most LLM-
based repair techniques utilize LLMs as an end-to-end
learning-based patch generator and are developed sepa-
rately from mature traditional techniques. Inspired by the
fact that learning-based APR is complementary to tradi-
tional repair, Zhang et al. [18] propose G AMMA to combine
the advance of LLMs and well-known template-based re-
pair. GAMMA summarizes a variety of fix templates, trans-
forms them into mask patterns, and adopts LLMs to predict
the correct code for masked code as a fill-in-the-blank task.
Ruiz et al. [323] explore the potential of LLMs to repair
bugs with a round-trip translation strategy. At the same
time, Peng et al. [324] propose a domain-aware prompt-
based approach TypeFix to repair Python type errors with
fix templates.
Empirical Evaluation of LLMs. In conjunction with the
aforementioned repair strategies tackling certain technical
obstacles, there has been a concurrent surge in empirical
studies examining the development and nuances of these
methodologies. These empirical studies systematically ex-
plore the actual performance of LLMs during the repair
workflow, with the sim to furnish insights for forthcoming
program repair endeavors [325], [326]. For example, in 2022,
Xia et al. [11] conduct an extensive study on the application
of LLMs in real-world bug-fixing, with nine LLMs of vary-
ing sizes. In 2023, Jiang et al. [327] evaluate ten code LLMs
on four APR benchmarks, to discuss the impact of fine-
tuning, model size, and repair costs. Unlike previous studies
focusing on software bugs [11], [327], Fanet al. [328] conduct
a systematic study to explore whether APR techniques can
fix the incorrect solutions produced by language models in
LeetCode contests Besides, with the rise of ChatGPT, a mass
of research efforts have been made to explore the potential
of ChatGPT in repair scenarios, such as QuixBugs [329] and
DL prorgam [330].
Domain Repair. In the LLM-based APR field, re-
searchers have paid considerable attention to semantic and
syntax bugs, which represent the most common application
of the repair techniques discussed above. Unlike tradi-
tional APR, LLMs are pre-trained from a wide range of
datasets to learn general language knowledge and can be
applied to a wider range of repair scenarios. For example,

--- PDF PAGE 22 ---
22
in 2023, Jin et al. [331] propose InferFix, a Transformer-
based approach based on Codex, to automatically fix both
critical security and performance bugs detected by the
static analysis tool Infer. So far, researchers have utilized
different strategies (e.g., zero-shot learning, fine-tuning, and
few-shot learning) to integrate LLMs into various repair
domains, including real-world issues [332], static warn-
ing [331], [333], syntax error [334], benchmark [335], neu-
ral network implementation [336], integrated development
environment [337], human study [338], programming prob-
lems [339], repair agent [340], [341], interactive repair[342],
[343], multi-location repair [344], [345], repair costs [346],
and formal proof [347].
4.4.2 Security Vulnerability Repair
Software vulnerability predominantly pertains to the weak-
nesses or flaws found within the software’s code or de-
sign, which can potentially be exploited to compromise
the security or functionality of the hardware or network
it operates on. Unlike common software bugs focused on
by most repair work, securities are more damaging and
require more urgent fixes, making it critical to automate
vulnerability fixes. Security researchers have to spend a
huge amount of effort to manually fix such vulnerable
functions, resulting in delays in vulnerability remediation
and providing opportunities for attacks. With the successful
application of LLMs in program repair, researchers have
begun to apply LLMs to help under-resourced security
researchers fix software vulnerabilities automatically. We
summarize existing vulnerability repair studies empowered
with LLMs as follows.
Fine-tuning LLM-based Vulnerability Repair. VulRe-
pair [348] is an early-stage LLM-based vulnerability repair
approach by directly fine-tuning CodeT5. VQM [349] is
a successor of VulRepair by leveraging a cross-attention
mechanism to locate vulnerable code elements during patch
generation. VulMaster [350] fine-tunes CodeT5 with infor-
mation from diverse sources, including the structure of
vulnerable code and expert knowledge.
Zero-shot LLM-based Vulnerability Repair. In 2023,
Pearce et al. [351] examine a zero-shot vulnerability repair
approach, assessing the potential of large language mod-
els such as OpenAI’s Codex and AI21’s Jurassic J-1. The
primary research challenge lies in designing prompts that
prompt LLMs to generate corrected versions of insecure
code. The study emphasizes the use of commercially avail-
able black-box LLMs, as well as open-source models and
locally trained models, for extensive research experiments
on synthetic, handcrafted, and real-world security vulnera-
bility scenarios.
Empirical Study of LLM-based Vulnerability Repair.In
2023, Zhang et al. [12] conduct the first extensive empirical
study to investigate the actual performance of various LLMs
on vulnerability repair, involving more than 100 fine-tuned
LLMs. First, they demonstrate that through simple fine-
tuning, LLMs are able to outperform state-of-the-art vulner-
ability repair techniques. Second, they delved into studying
the impact of LLMs on the repair workflow, including
data pre-processing, model training, and repair inference
phrases. Third, they develop a straightforward vulnerability
repair strategy, leveraging transfer learning from bug-fixing,
and demonstrate that such a simplified approach further
enhances the prediction accuracy of LLMs. Furthermore,
they offer additional insights by discussing various aspects,
such as code representation and a preliminary study with
ChatGPT, to illuminate the capabilities and limitations of
LLM-based vulnerability repair approaches. Finally, they
precisely identify several practical guidelines, such as en-
hancing fine-tuning, to advance LLM-based vulnerability
repair in the imminent future. Besides, Wu et al. [15] com-
pare the performance of LLMs with existing learning-based
vulnerability repair techniques, including Codex, CodeGen,
CodeT5, PLBART and InCoder. A similar study is conducted
by Huang et al. [326]. In 2023, Tol et al. [352] empirically
explore the potential of leveraging LLMs to automatically
generate patches for side-channel vulnerabilities.
4.4.3 Patch Correctness Assessment
It is a common practice for the majority of extant program
repair methodologies to predominantly utilize developer-
constructed test suites as the program specification, serving
to evaluate the accuracy of the patches produced. Never-
theless, such an existing test suite represents an inherently
partial specification, delineating only a segment of the pro-
gram’s behavioral domain. Thus, repair approaches may
suffer from the patch overfitting issue ( i.e., patches passing
the available test suites fail to generalize to other potential
test suites), limiting the value and deployment of such re-
pair approaches in real-world scenarios. Patch correctness is
a crucial phase for developers to further filter out overfitting
patches after patch generation (detailed in Section 4.4.1), so
as to improve the quality of returned patches. The patch
overfitting issue is a long-standing challenge in the program
repair community and some independent studies have been
conducted to address it. We summarize these works from
three aspects, i.e., LLMs as feature extractor, fine-tuning-
based APCA and zero-shot-based APCA. First, as early as
2020, Tian et al. [353], [354] investigate the effectiveness of
representation learning for for patch correctness assessment.
They select four embedding models, including re-trained
(i.e., Doc2vec, code2vec and CC2vec) and pre-trained mod-
els ( i.e., BERT), marking the first application of BERT in
this field. In 2022, Tian et al. [355] propose Quatrain, which
utilizes CodeTrans to generate patch descriptions, and BERT
to embed bug reports and patch descriptions. Recently,
Invalidator [356] identifies the correctness of patches via
semantic and syntactic reasoning. Second, APPT [357] is
the first approach that fine-tunes LLMs to predict patch
correctness. APPT consists of three components: (1) BERT to
extract features from source code tokens; (2) LSTM to cap-
ture dependency information between source and repaired
code snippets; and (3) a DL classifier to predict whether a
patch is overfitting or not. Third, PatchZero [358] attempts to
predict patch correctness in a zero-shot manner. PatchZero
reformats the format of the patch correctness assessment
task to match the original pre-training objective of the LLMs.
Molina et al. [359] introduce FixCheck to filter out incorrect
patches by combining random testing and LLMs to generate
fault-revealing test cases.

--- PDF PAGE 23 ---
23
4.4.4 Commit Message Generation
Commit message generation attempts to create natural lan-
guage descriptions for code commits. It begins with mod-
ified code snippets and employs template-based, retrieval-
based, or learning-based models to generate commit mes-
sages. The key lies in understanding the context of code
modifications and accurately describing these changes in the
commit messages. For example, Jung et al. [360] introduce
CommitBERT to generate messages by using CodeBERT
as the initial weight during training. Wang et al. [361]
introduce ExGroFi to fine-tune LLMs by incorporating the
correlation between commits and issues during the training
process. Li et al. [362] utilize the reasoning capabilities of
LLMs to generate commit messages by framing it as a
knowledge-intensive reasoning task. Regarding empirical
studies, Xue et al. [363] explore the effectiveness of different
LLMs in generating commit messages, and Lopes et al. [364]
focus on the ChatGPT.
4.4.5 Code Review
Code review is a critical process in the software develop-
ment lifecycle, withe the aim of enhancing code quality by
identifying and resolving issues before the code is merged
into the main codebase. In code review practices, developers
are tasked with thoroughly examining, understanding, and
executing the code under review. This process involves
evaluating various aspects of the code, such as its logic,
functionality, performance, and style.
To reduce human review efforts, early work in this
community primarily focuses on training domain LLMs
based on T5 to automate the code review process [365],
[366], [367]. For example, Li et al. [366] introduce AUGER
to generate code review comments by pre-training T5 with
a masked language modeling object. Tufano et al. [365] pre-
train and fine-tune T5 to support different tasks, such as
comment generation and code refinement. Initialized with
CodeT5, CodeReviewer is pre-trained with four pre-training
tasks specifically designed for the code review scenario:
diff tag prediction, denoising code diff, denoising review
comment, and review comment generation. Researchers also
conduct some empirical studies from different aspects [368],
[369] For example, Guo et al. [370] explore the potential of
ChatGPT in code review tasks, with a specific focus on code
refinement based on code reviews. This study involves var-
ious research aspects, including the impact of prompt and
temperature settings, the comparison with CodeReviewer,
the qualitative analysis, and the analysis of root causes.
4.4.6 Bug Report Detection
Duplicate bug report detection attempts to automatically
identify and label duplicate bug reports in issue tracking
systems, enabling developers to avoid redundantly deal-
ing with the same issues. In the report detection process,
researchers utilize LLMs to compare and analyze the sim-
ilarity between different bug reports to determine if they
describe the same defect or problem. For example, in 2023,
Zhang et al. [371] introduce Cupid, which integrates the
traditional detection approach REP with ChatGPT. Cupid
utilizes ChatGPT in a zero-shot setting to extract key infor-
mation from bug reports, which is then used as input for
REP to detect duplicate bug reports. Meanwhile, Plein et
al. [372] conduct empirical research, as outlined in [372],
on how to utilize ChatGPT to transform user-provided
software defect reports into formal test case specifications.
They employ ChatGPT to generate test cases and evaluate
the executability and validity of these generated test cases.
Experimental results demonstrate the significant potential
of ChatGPT in converting informal defect reports into for-
mal test cases, holding crucial implications for automated
software testing and defect resolution tasks.
4.4.7 Bug Reproduction
Bug reproduction, also known as bug replay, refers to the
process of reproducing or recreating software defects or
issues based on the information provided in a bug report.
The process is crucial for software maintenance as it enables
developers to understand, replicate, and fix the defects
reported.
In 2023, Kang et al. [373] introduce a framework named
LIBRO, which utilizes LLMs to generate potential test cases
from bug reports and subsequently ranks and suggests
these generated solutions through post-processing steps.
Focusing on mobile application crashes, Huang et al. [374]
presents CrashTranslator, which leverages LLMs to predict
the necessary exploration steps required to reproduce a
crash and uses reinforcement learning to improve the search
process and mitigate inaccurate predictions. Furthermore,
Feng et al. [375] propose a lightweight approach AdbGPT
to automatically reproduce Andriod bugs from bug reports
without any training.
4.4.8 Test Update
Test update refers to the process of modifying existing test
cases to align them with recent changes in the production
code. This is a crucial aspect of maintaining the quality
and relevance of software tests throughout the software
lifecycle. CEPROT [376] represents the first attempt to fine-
tune CodeT5 to automatically identify and update obsolete
method-level test cases in response to changes in production
code. SYNBCIATR [377] designs three target-oriented con-
texts ( i.e., class contexts, usage contexts, and environment
contexts), which are used to construct prompts to query
GPT-4 to generate repaired test cases. TaRGet [378] treats
the test update process as a language translation task by
fine-tuning LLMs with crucial context information.
4.4.9 Log Analysis
Logs record events that occur within a system, including
user actions, system activities, error messages, and security
alerts. Log analysis involves automatically examining and
interpreting this log data, which is essential for develop-
ers to understand system status and diagnose potential
problems. Existing approaches can be categorized into fine-
tuning [379], [380], few-shot [381], [382], [383], [384], [385],
and zero-shot learning [386], [387], [388]. For example, Le et
al. [381] explore using prompt-based few-shot learning for
log parsing, leveraging the flexibility of prompts to adapt
to various log formats with minimal training examples. Re-
searchers also empirically explore the potential of LLMs in
log analysis, including the impact of data resampling [389],

--- PDF PAGE 24 ---
24
structuring logs [390], detecting unusual behaviors [390],
[391], log-based question-answering [392], interpreting and
categorizing logs[393].
4.4.10 Code Clone Detection
Code Clone Detection attempts to identify duplicate or simi-
lar code segments within a software codebase based on code
similarity analysis. Zhang et al. [394] conduct the first em-
pirical study to explore the potential of ChatGPT and GPT-4
in the task of code clone detection. Moumoula et al. [395]
investigate the capabilities of four LLMs for detecting code
clones across different programming languages with eight
different prompt configurations. Douet al. [396] explores dif-
ferent aspects of LLMs’ capabilities by examining five differ-
ent perspectives: simple prompts, one-step chain-of-thought
prompts, multi-step chain-of-thought prompts, code embed-
dings, and multiple programming languages.
In addition to the aforementioned studies, researchers
also leverage LLMs to automate a variety of software
maintenance tasks, including bug triaging [397], [398], code
smell [399], emotion-cause extraction [400], exception han-
dling recommendation [401], incident management [402],
[403], issue labeling [404], privacy policy [405], code port-
ing [406], compiler optimization [407], [408], and Android
permission-related problems resolution [409].
4.5 Software Management
Software management refers to the practice of overseeing
the entire software lifecycle, ensuring that software products
are delivered on time, within budget, and meet quality
standards. To date, researchers mainly utilize LLMs to per-
form effort estimation, software tool configuration, devel-
opers’ behavior analysis, and software repository mining.
First, effort estimation attempts to predict the amount of
time, resources, and effort required to complete a software
project. Alhamed et al. [410] explores the potential of BERT
with expert features to estimate the effort required for
software maintenance tasks. Fine-SE [411] combines both
semantic and expert features to develop an automatic inte-
grated BERT-based approach for effort estimation. Second,
software tool configuration attempts to ensure that the
appropriate tools are selected and configured. Kannan et
al. [412] discusses various prompting strategies for interact-
ing with GPT-4 in configuring tools like machine learning
frameworks and complex software systems. Third, analyz-
ing developers’ behavior is crucial for project managers to
understand team dynamics, productivity, and collaboration
patterns. Cai et al. [401] conduct the first attempt to utilize
LLMs to detect the causes of emotions within developer
communications. They focus on zero-shot LLMs, such as
ChatGPT and GPT-4, to automatically recognize and extract
the causes behind emotional expressions such as frustration,
happiness, or anger in platforms such as GitHub and Stack
Overflow. Imran et al. [413] conduct an empirical study for
emotion classification by fine-tuning LLMs, such as BERT,
RoBERTa, CodeBERT and GraphCodeBERT. Fourth, soft-
ware repository mining involves analyzing and extracting
useful information from software repositories, thus helping
project managers gain insights into development trends,
team productivity, code quality, and project health. Abeduet
al. [414] explore the performance of LLMs answering ques-
tions related to software repositories to lower the barrier for
stakeholders by automating the extraction and analysis of
repository data.
Answer to RQ2: Overall, LLMs have been employed
across various stages of SE research, tackling a di-
verse array of 112 tasks. On the one hand, these tasks
align with previous downstream ones (detailed in Sec-
tion 3.3), yet they are explored more thoroughly, such
as program repair. On the other hand, researchers have
turned their attention to a greater number of more com-
plex SE tasks. These tasks may (1) include complex pro-
cesses that LLMs cannot fully handle, such as fuzzing;
(2) include other inputs, such as test reports and GUI
testing; and (3) include some unique areas of SE, such
as fuzzing. Researchers need to devote more effort to
addressing these more domain-specific issues, such as
designing specific LLMs or embedding them into ex-
isting research workflow. Notably, software testing and
development have seen more extensive applications of
LLMs. This trend may stem from the fact that these areas
often serve as foundational downstream tasks for LLMs,
where they have shown considerable promise. Besides,
these tasks can be addressed naturally by existing LLMs
in the form of sequence-to-sequence code generation.
However, the application of LLMs in software require-
ments & design and software management is still rela-
tively unexplored, suggesting a potential area of focus
for future research in this field.
5 RQ3: I NTEGRATION PERSPECTIVE
In the rapidly evolving field of SE, LLMs have emerged
as pivotal roles, offering unprecedented opportunities for
various code-related tasks. However, the integration of
LLMs in SE is not without challenges due to the inherent
characteristics of LLMs, such as the record-breaking param-
eters making it difficult to deploy in practical scenarios.
This section delves into four crucial aspects of integrating
LLMs for SE, focusing on evaluation and benchmarking in
Section 5.1, security and reliability in Section 5.2, domain
tuning in Section 5.3, and compressing and distillation in
Section 5.4.
5.1 Evaluation and Benchmarking
Despite an emerging research area, a variety of LLMs have
been proposed and have continuously achieved promising
results across a variety of SE tasks. In addition to developing
new techniques that address technical challenges, the LLM-
based SE research field is benefiting from empirical studies
and benchmarks.
5.1.1 Empirical Study
In Section 4, when introducing specific SE tasks, we have
discussed corresponding empirical studies, such as program
repair [327] and vulnerability repair [12]. We also notice
there exist some empirical studies that systematically ex-
plore the capabilities of LLMs from a more comprehensive
perspective, such as human study and educational scenar-
ios.

--- PDF PAGE 25 ---
25
Exploration for Multiple Tasks . These studies explore
LLMs across multiple LLMs or tasks, providing macro-
scopic insights into future LLM-based SE work. In 2022,
Mastropaolo et al. [415] empirically evaluate the perfor-
mance of transfer learning on four code-related tasks by
pre-training and fine-tuning T5, including (1) automatic
bug-fixing, (2) injection of code mutants, (3) generation of
assert statements, and (4) code summarization. Lu et al. [51]
conduct an empirical study to investigate the performance
of three common LLMs in the CodeXGLUE benchmark
(discussed in Section 5.1.2), including the BERT-style, GPT-
style, and Encoder-Decoder models. As a pioneering work,
this study only reports some preliminary results on a limited
set of models. In 2022, Zeng et al. [416] conduct a com-
prehensive study of eight LLMs across seven code-related
tasks in the CodeXGLUE dataset. The study covers three
types of LLMs, including three encoder-based models ( i.e.,
CodeBERT, GraphCodeBERT, ContraCode), one decoder-
only model (i.e., CodeGPT), and four encoder-decoder LLMs
(i.e., CodeT5, CodeTrans, CoTexT and PLBART). The se-
lected LLMs are evaluated on three code understanding
tasks (i.e., defect detection, clone detection, and code search)
and four code generation tasks ( i.e., code summarization,
code repair, code translation, and code generation). In 2023,
Niu et al. [417] perform a large systematic study of 19 LLMs
on 13 SE tasks. Besides, researchers explore the performance
of LLMs in SE tasks regarding different aspects, including
in-context learning [418], prompt design [419], code distri-
butions [420].
Human Study and Empirical Replication . Liang et
al. [421] explore how LLMs can be utilized to support
human participation tasks in empirical software engineer-
ing. This study involves four LLMs (including ChatGPT,
ERNIE Bot, Gemini, and ChatGLM) and three types of
prompts (including zero-shot, one-shot, and optimized one-
shot prompts). Endres et al. [263] investigate the potential of
GPT-4 to replicate empirical software engineering research.
They query GPT-4 to generate assumptions, analysis plans,
and code modules based on the methodologies described
in seven papers and conduct a user study involving 14
participants to evaluate the quality of the outputs generated
by GPT-4.
Empirical Exploration of SE Education . In the SE com-
munity, the current research on LLMs has primarily focused
on various code-related tasks and has achieved notable
results. Given the powerful NL capabilities ( e.g., ChatGPT)
and extensive programming knowledge inherent in LLMs,
their interaction with students to complete programming
tasks is becoming increasingly promising. The community
has engaged in empirical discussions about the potential
of LLMs in the SE education scenario from various dimen-
sions. On the one hand, it is exciting for LLMs to introduce
innovative methods for learning and teaching, facilitating a
more interactive and dynamic educational environment. On
the other hand, there exists a growing concern regarding the
potential misuse of these LLMs by students, such as relying
excessively on automated solutions without developing crit-
ical problem-solving skills.
Thus, researchers explore the potential and concerns of
LLMs in the SE education scenario. For example, to ex-
plore ChatGPT’s effectiveness in answering software testing
questions from a textbook, in 2023, Jalil et al. [422] evaluate
ChatGPT with 31 questions from five topics like software
faults, test driven development, and coverage criteria. The
study focuses on the accuracy of ChatGPT’s answers and
explanations under different prompting strategies. At the
same time, to explore how well ChatGPT can perform
in an introductory-level functional language programming
course, Geng et al. [423] select a second-year undergradu-
ate computer science course to test ChatGPT. When LLMs
(e.g., ChatGPT) are used by students during their learning
processes, despite their potential, there may arise some con-
cerns. For example, students might directly employ LLMs
to complete assignments without self-thinking, leading to
ineffective learning and even plagiarism concerns. To ad-
dress such concerns, in 2023, Nguyen et al. [424] present an
empirical study to investigate the feasibility of automated
identification of AI-generated code snippets. They propose
a CodeBERT-based classifier called GPTSniffer to detect
source code written by LLMs. Tian et al. [425] conduct an
empirical analysis of ChatGPT’s potential as a fully auto-
mated programming assistant. Xue et al. [426] investigate
the performance of ChatGPT in assisting students in an
introductory computer science course. This study is con-
ducted in a classroom setting and includes both quantitative
and qualitative analyses to understand the impact of using
ChatGPT on students’ learning outcomes and behaviors
during programming assignments.
5.1.2 Benchmarking
Benchmarking plays a crucial role in LLM-based SE re-
search, helping to drive the advancement of this rapidly
evolving field. Existing benchmarks in the community can
be broadly classified into two categories. The first category
consists of existing datasets created by traditional SE re-
search, which are generally well-established and have been
validated by the community over time. Details can be found
in prior SE survey papers [427], [3]. The second category
includes newly developed datasets tailored specifically for
LLM-based SE research. These new datasets primarily focus
on two aspects: addressing challenges unique to LLMs and
exploring various SE domains, summarized as follows.
First, different from traditional SE studies, the pipeline of
LLM-based SE techniques is three-fold, i.e., (1) a pre-training
process with unsupervised learning on large datasets; (2) a
fine-tuning process with supervised learning with labeled
datasets; and (3) an evaluation process with limited datasets.
As a result, such LLMs are usually trained from all possible
open-source projects in the wild, and it is difficult to ensure
there exist no samples in the evaluation benchmark that
appear in the pre-training dataset, i.e., the data leakage
problem. To address this issue, researchers conduct new
benchmarks from artifacts that are released after the training
cutoff date of ChatGPT. For example, Zhang et al. [428]
extensively explore the data leakage issue of ChatGPT in
the program domain and introduce EvalGPTFix, a new
benchmark based on competitive programming problems
collected after 2021. Several other benchmarks includes
HumanEval-Java [327], ConDefects [429] and HITS [430]
Second, some benchmarks are tailored for different SE
scenarios. HumanEval [52] is initially released by OpenAI
to evaluate the code generation capabilities of Codex and

--- PDF PAGE 26 ---
26
has been the most popular benchmark in LLM-based code
generation. HumanEval-X [61] is an extended version of Hu-
manEval, specifically designed to evaluate the multilingual
code generation capabilities of LLMs. Unlike HumanEval
only for Python code generation, HumanEval-X supports
both code generation and code translation tasks, spanning
Python, C++, Java, JavaScript, and Go. EvalPlus [431] en-
hances HumanEval by generating additional high-quality
test inputs. CodeXGlUE [51] is constructed by Microsoft to
support a collection of ten code understanding and gen-
eration tasks and six programming languages. Compared
with CodeXGLUE, CrossCodeBench [432] provides a larger
scale and more diverse code-related tasks, including 216
tasks and more than 54M data instances. Recently, LLMs
have been applied in som SE scenarios that have not been
previously investigated, resulting in a gap in relevant bench-
marks. As a result, with the advent of LLM-based SE tech-
niques, researchers have also developed corresponding new
datasets, such as class-level code generation [433], project-
level code generation [137], code decompilation [227], code
retrieval [434].
5.2 Security and Reliability
As LLMs have been widely utilized and achieved state-
of-the-art performances in various code-related tasks, the
security of these models deserves an increasing number
of attention. Similar to conventional deep learning models,
LLMs have been shown to be vulnerable to adversarial
attacks [435], i.e., generating totally different results given
two semantically-identical source code snippets. This is
particularly alarming given that LLMs are deployed in
some mission-critical applications, such as vulnerability
detection and code search. For example, an attacker can
manipulate LLMs to, (1) in vulnerability detection, output
a non-vulnerable label for a piece of code that actually
contains vulnerabilities, with the intention of preserving the
vulnerabilities in a software system; and (2) in code search,
rank the malicious code snippet high in the search results
such that it can be adopted in real-world deployed software,
such as autonomous driving systems. Such attacks on LLMs
may cause serious incidents and have a negative societal
impact. In the field of SE, there has been some preliminary
exploration of the attacks on LLMs for different SE tasks.
In the following, we summarize existing studies on at-
tacking LLMs for SE, which mainly fall into four categories
according to attack strategies.
Adversarial Attack for Code LLMs. An adversarial
attack refers to an attempt to deceive models into making
incorrect decisions or predictions by inserting subtle, imper-
ceptible alterations to input data. In 2022, Yang et al. [435]
propose ALERT, an adversarial attack for Code LLMs to en-
sure that the generated adversarial examples must maintain
naturalness while preserving operational semantics to cater
to human reviewers’ needs. ALERT employs both Greedy-
Attack and GA-Attack to search for adversarial examples,
followed by conducting a user study to assess whether the
substitutes generated by ALERT can produce adversarial
examples that appear natural to human evaluators. ALERT
conducts adversarial attacks on CodeBERT and GraphCode-
BERT across three downstream tasks, i.e., vulnerability pre-
diction, clone detection, and authorship attribution. Unlike
ALERT focuses on code understanding tasks, like vulnera-
bility detection and clone detection, Jha et al. [436] propose
CodeAttack, the first work to perform adversarial attacks
on different code generation tasks. CodeAttack attempts to
generate imperceptible, effective, and minimally perturbed
adversarial code samples based on code structure. CodeAt-
tack selects representative LLMs from different categories
as victim models to attack, including CodeT5, CodeBERT,
GraphCodeBERT, RoBERTa, and generates adversarial sam-
ples for different tasks, including code translation, code
repair, and code summarization.
Backdoor Attack for Code LLMs. A backdoor attack
involves secretly making poison samples embedded with
triggers ( e.g., a specific word) during training, so that the
target model normally performs on inputs without triggers
(i.e., clean inputs) from ordinary users, but yields targeted
erroneous behaviors on inputs with triggers ( i.e., poison
inputs) from attackers. By using triggers to activate back-
doors, attackers can manipulate the output of poisoned
models and lead to severe consequences. Such attacks en-
able perpetrators to manipulate the output of compromised
models, potentially leading to severe consequences. For
example, attackers can attack vulnerability detection models
to mislabel a vulnerable piece of code as non-vulnerable.
As early in 2021, Schuster et al. [437] perform a backdoor
attack against the code completion model, including GPT-2.
In 2022, Wan et al. [438] perform the first backdoor attack
for code search models, including an encoder-only Code
LLM CodeBERT. The attack utilizes two types of a piece
of dead code as the backdoor trigger, including a piece of
fixed logging code and a grammar trigger generated by the
probabilistic context-free grammar.
However, the previously designed triggers ( i.e., dead
code snippets) are very suspicious and can be easily identi-
fied by developers [438]. Thus, focusing on more stealthy at-
tack, in 2023, Sun et al. [439] propose BADCODE, a backdoor
attack approach targeting neural code search models by
altering function and variable names, BADCODE mutates
function and/or variable names in the original code snippet
by adding extensions to existing function/variable names,
such as changing “function()” to “function aux()”. BAD-
CODE utilizes LLMs CodeBERT and CodeT5, and fine-tunes
them on the CodeSearchNet dataset, using both fixed trig-
gers and grammar triggers (PCFG) as baselines. Recently,
AFRAIDOOR [440] leverages adversarial perturbations to
inject adaptive triggers into code LLMs. Unlike previous
studies designed for specific tasks, Li et al. [441] propose
CodePoisoner, a general backdoor attack approach for three
code-related tasks (i.e., defect detection, clone detection, and
code repair) and three models, including an LLM-based
one CodeBERT. In parallel to CodePoisoner, Li et al. [442]
propose a task-agnostic attack approach to train backdoored
models during pre-training, so as to support the multi-target
downstream tasks. The attack is designed on two LLMs
(i.e., PLBART and CodeT5) and two code understanding
tasks (i.e., defect detection, clone detection) and three code
generation tasks (i.e., code translation, code refinement, and
code generation) from CodeXGLUE.
Imitation Attack for Code LLMs. An imitation attack
refers to an attempt to create a local model (also known
as an imitation model) that mimics the behavior of a tar-

--- PDF PAGE 27 ---
27
get model without having access to the target’s internal
architecture or training data. In 2023, Li et al. [443] propose
the first imitation attack work to explore the feasibility of
extracting specialized code abilities from LLMs sing com-
mon medium-sized models. The attack employs OpenAI’s
text-davinci-003 as the target LLM, CodeBERT and CodeT5
as imitation LLMs for training, and considers three code-
related tasks, i.e., code synthesis, code translation and code
summarization. The attack pipeline is four-fold, including
(1) generating queries from LLMs tailored to different code-
related tasks and query schemes; (2)designing a rule-based
filter to select high-quality responses suitable for training;
and (3) fine-tuning medium-sized backbone models with
these filtered responses to train the imitation model.
Others. In addition to the studies detailed above,
researchers also explore the security and reliability of
LLMs from a mass of perspectives, including human
study [444], [445], [446], [447], glitch token analysis [448],
testing [449], [450], [451], memorization detection [452],
auto-generated code quality assurance [453], [454], [455],
auto-generated code detection [456], knowledge under-
standing [457], model analysis [458], and jailbreak vulner-
ability fuzzing [459].
5.3 Domain Tuning
As mentioned in Section 4, the pre-training-and-fine-tuning
paradigm has been a crucial means of adapting LLMs to
special domains. Typically, LLMs are first pre-trained to
learn the general purpose code representations on a large
amount of data and then fine-tuned to targeted tasks.
While fine-tuning LLMs has proven to be effective, it comes
with significant computational and energy costs due to the
record-breaking parameter scale. For example, it takes about
2 days to train CodeT5 with the parameter size of 220M on
NVIDIA A100-40G GPUs for program repair [460], let alone
more advanced LLMs with hundreds of millions or even
billions of parameters. Besides, when fine-tuning LLMs
on new datasets, it is inevitable to suffer from the catas-
trophic forgetting problem [16], i.e., forgetting the knowl-
edge learned from previous datasets. In the field of SE, there
has been some preliminary exploration of the optimizations
on LLMs during the fine-tuning phase. In the following,
we summarize existing studies on fine-tuning LLMs for SE,
which mainly fall into three categories according to previous
issues.
Efficient Parameter Fine-tuning. Such studies involve
efficient training strategies to reduce the time and resource
costs during fine-tuning [461], [163], [462], [463], [464]. For
example, Liu et al. [463] conduct an empirical study to
explore the performance of parameter-efficient fine-tuning
methods on two LLMs and four code-related tasks, includ-
ing adapter tuning, prefix tuning and low-rank adaptation.
In 2023, considering that fine-tuning LLMs incurs a high
computational cost, Shi et al. [461] attempt to reduce the
number of parameters that need to be updated by selec-
tively freezing layers that encode code basic properties well
and only fine-tuning the more dynamically changing upper
layers. Wang et al. [163] utilize adapter tuning to improve
performance in code search and summarization tasks across
multiple programming languages.
Effective Continual Fine-tuning Such studies involve
effective training strategies to address the catastrophic for-
getting issue during fine-tuning [465], [16], [466], [466]. For
example, As early as 2022, Yuan et al. [16] propose a T5-
based program repair CIRCLE equipped with continual
learning ability across multiple programming languages.
The experimental results demonstrate that CIRCLE not
only effectively repairs multiple programming languages in
continual learning settings, but also achieves state-of-the-
art performance on five benchmarks with a single repair
model. Since LLMs can easily forget knowledge learned
from previous datasets when learning from the new dataset,
in 2023, Gao et al. [465] introduce REPEAT, a method to
address forgetting issues in LLMs during continual learn-
ing. REPEAT incorporates representative exemplars replay,
where selected diverse and informative samples from pre-
vious datasets are used to retrain the model, preventing
memory loss. Besides, Weyssow et al. [466] investigate how
to adapt PLMs to the dynamic nature of software develop-
ment with continual learning, including replay-based and
regularization-based strategies.
Others. In addition to the studies mentioned above,
researchers utilize various tuning strategies to adapt LLMs
for the SE domain, including noise-tolerant training [467],
instruction tuning [234], [468], reinforcement learning [469],
[179], and prompt learning [470].
5.4 Compressing and Distillation
Once LLMs are well-trained and achieve impressive results
in various SE tasks, they need to be further deployed in
real-world scenarios, such as integrated development en-
vironments. However, such LLMs consume hundreds of
megabytes of memory and run slowly on personal devices,
which results in an impediment to the wide and fluent
adoption of these powerful models in the daily workflow
of software developers. To address these challenges, some
optimization strategies have been utilized by SE researchers
to enhance the usability and practicality of LLMs during
deployment. For example, Shi et al. [471] propose Compres-
sor to compress LLMs into extremely small models without
compromising performance. Compressor utilizes a genetic
algorithm-based strategy to guide the process of model
simplification, and adopts knowledge distillation to obtain a
well-performing small model. Compressor compresses two
well-known LLMs (i.e., CodeBERT and GraphCodeBERT) to
a size of 3 MB on two important tasks ( i.e., vulnerability
prediction and clone detection). Besides, Su et al. [472] intro-
duce a smaller, distilled model with outputs generated by
GPT-3.5 to generate concise natural language descriptions
of source code.
Answer to RQ3: Overall, although a large amount of
research effort has been devoted to how LLMs can be
adapted to automate SE tasks more effectively, the liter-
ature has also seen some orthogonal works discussing
the unique challenges encountered during the process of
adaption. First, benchmarks play a pivotal role in shap-
ing the trajectory of research advancements. One typical
trend is the construction of new benchmarks to address
the data leakage issue, e.g., HumanEval, and EvalGPT-

--- PDF PAGE 28 ---
28
Fix. The other typical trend is the application of various
SE tasks, e.g., CodeXGLUE and CrossCodeBench. Sec-
ond, researchers have constructed a mass of empirical
studies to explore the actual performance of LLMs from
different aspects, including multiple tasks, human study
and SE education. Third, LLMs can be attacked to
generate vulnerable code snippets or return the wrong
classifications with different attack strategies, such as
adversarial attack, backdoor attack, and imitation at-
tack. Fouth, considering the huge parameter scale of
LLMs, it is crucial to design domain-tuning strategies
to adapt such LLMs in SE tasks, such as parameter
and continual fine-tuning. Fifth, after LLMs are well-
trained, deploying such LLMs within the development
workflow necessitates further consideration of factors
such as inference time and resource expenditure.
6 C HALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES
Our survey reveals that advances in LLMs for SE have a
significant impact on both academia and industry. Despite
achieving promising progress, there are still numerous chal-
lenges that need to be addressed, providing abundant op-
portunities for further research and applications. We discuss
the following important practical guidelines for future LLM-
based SE research.
Trade-off between Effectiveness and Model Size . As
discussed in Section 3.1, the community tends to introduce
the growing size of models, resulting in the recent emer-
gence of LLMs with record-breaking parameters, e.g., from
117M parameters of GPT-1 to 175B parameters of GPT-3.
This trend is reasonable, as existing studies have demon-
strated that larger models usually yield better performance,
e.g., code generation [22] and program repair [11], high-
lighting the significance of the number of model parameters
in performance enhancement. However, models with such
a large number of parameters may raise some concerns
during training and deployment. First, it is extremely time-
consuming and resource-intensive to train such LLMs, es-
pecially since the GPU resources required are unaffordable
for most researchers in academia and even in the corpo-
rate world. For example, e.g., it takes 12 days to train the
medium-sized CodeT5-base model (220M parameters) with
16 NVIDIA A100 GPUs. Second, it is difficult to deploy such
LLMs in real-world scenarios, as they consume hundreds of
megabytes of memory and disk space, e.g., Code Llama-
34B takes about 63GB of disk space 4. Thus, LLMs may
run slowly on personal devices and cannot be deployed on
resource-constrained or real-time terminal devices, such as
mobile devices and autonomous driving.
We recommend that future work can be conducted in the
following three directions. First, it is promising to optimize
the size of LLMs without significantly compromising their
performance, such as model pruning, quantization, and
knowledge distillation [471]. Second, researchers can de-
velop lightweight models tailored for specific applications
or techniques for distributed computing, enabling parts of a
model to run on different devices.
4. The model size is according to Code Llama’s checkpoint im-
plemented by HuggingFace in https://huggingface.co/codellama/
CodeLlama-34b-hf
Exploring Task-oriented Domain LLMs . As discussed
in Section 3.3, although LLMs are increasingly being ap-
plied in the SE community, the majority of these models
are designed with general-purpose training strategies to
support multiple downstream tasks. However, there are
some concerns with the adoption of such general LLMs.
First, LLMs need to learn general knowledge about nat-
ural language and different programming languages from
extremely large datasets, leading to the model’s vast size.
Second, LLMs contain a vast array of knowledge, much
of which is irrelevant to specific tasks. Third, their pre-
training tasks are universal, creating a certain gap with the
downstream tasks. For example, existing LLMs are usually
trained with a given code snippet and the corresponding
description, which can hardly be exploited to learn the code
change patterns for some code-editing tasks that involve
two code snippets. Thus, employing existing LLMs for such
editing tasks will inevitably lead to inconsistent inputs and
objectives between pre-training and fine-tuning.
We recommend future work to explore domain LLMs
for specific tasks. For example, researchers can design LLMs
specifically for unit testing scenarios ( e.g., test generation
and update), focusing solely on learning domain knowledge
relevant to unit testing with specific pre-training objectives.
Clean Evaluation Datasets . LLMs have been gaining
increasing attention and demonstrated promising perfor-
mance across a variety of SE tasks, such as program repair
and code generation. However, there exists a potential risk
of data leakage since such LLMS are usually trained with
all possible public repositories in the wild. As mentioned in
Section 5.1.2, researchers [18] find that some code snippets
in Defects4J, the widely-adopted benchmark in the pro-
gram repair literature, are leaked in CodeSearchNet, which
is the most popular dataset to train LLMs, e.g., CodeT5,
CodeBERT, and UniXcoder. More importantly, the greater
concern arises from the black-box LLMs developed by com-
mercial companies, which often outperform open-source
LLMs. It is difficult to ensure whether or not the evaluation
dataset has been seen by such LLMs during training as
these LLMs are usually closed-source with unknown spe-
cific training details, e.g., pre-training datasets. For example,
ChatGPT, the latest black-box LLM, has been investigated
by numerous recent research studies and has shown im-
pressive performance in various code-related tasks. How-
ever, researchers find that ChatGPT can directly provide
complete descriptions and the corresponding solution by
simply providing it with the number of a programming
problem in LeetCode. Considering the fact there exist a
quite number of black-box LLMs for which no architecture
or training data information has been released. The data
leaking on such LLMs is a significant concern when it comes
to evaluating their performance in some code-related tasks
in the SE community.
We recommend that future work can be carried out from
two perspectives. First, the construction of clean datasets is
crucial to ensure they have not been contaminated by LLMs.
Three potential sources can be utilized for this purpose, (1)
The first source comes from manually written programs.
Similar to HumanEval [52], researchers can create evalua-
tion programs by hand so as to provide a unique and un-
contaminated benchmark. (2) The second source is the most

--- PDF PAGE 29 ---
29
recently released programs. Similar to EvalGPTFix [428],
researchers can seek out the latest programs, such as those
from recent competitions or coding challenge websites, as
they often contain fresh and diverse problems that are
less likely to have been included in the training sets of
current LLMs. (3) The third source is closed-source projects.
Researchers can evaluate LLMs with some internal projects
within the company, which are not previously exposed
to public repositories, thereby providing a more authentic
evaluation of the models’ capabilities in real-world scenar-
ios. In addition to clean dataset construction, it is essential
to design some techniques to verify whether LLMs exhibit
any form of data memorization for a given testing sample,
such as detecting if a model is simply recalling information
from its training data rather than genuinely understanding
or solving a problem.
Application on More SE Tasks . As discussed in Sec-
tion 4, we observe a pronounced emphasis on the ap-
plication of LLMs in software development, testing, and
maintenance. These areas have undoubtedly benefited from
the capabilities of LLMs, leading to impressive performance
in code completion [180], fault detection [473], program
repair [18] and so on. Despite its success in these tasks, there
are other tasks that have been popularly studied with tradi-
tional techniques or machine/deep learning techniques. For
example, the current application of LLMs in requirements
engineering, software design, and software management
remains relatively sparse.
We suggest that future work should concentrate on two
aspects to broaden the scope of LLM applications for more
SE tasks. First, for complex tasks, integrating LLMs into
existing research workflows as a component rather than
developing end-to-end solutions appears more pragmatic.
For example, existing regression test case prioritization ap-
proaches tend to calculate the similarity of selected test cases
and candidates based on code coverage and may fail to
consider the semantic similarity between different test cases.
Researchers can boost existing similarity-based prioritiza-
tion techniques via LLMs, which contain generic knowledge
pre-trained with millions of code snippets from open-source
projects, and provide accurate semantic information for test
code. This integration strategy leverages the strengths of
LLMs in augmenting and enhancing current approaches,
particularly in areas where conventional approaches have
reached a plateau in terms of performance. By combining
LLMs with established techniques, we can achieve more
robust and efficient outcomes in complex scenarios. Second,
for rare SE tasks where LLMs may lack rich knowledge,
it is promising to design domain-specific LLMs tailored
to these underrepresented areas. For example, a variety
of medium-sized LLMs are trained with CodeSearchNet
without test cases, thus failing to benefit tasks such as unit
test generation.
Multi-task and Multi-dimensional Benchmarks. As the
development of LLMs progresses, it is crucial to acquire and
prepare benchmarks that are more diverse, comprehensive,
and realistic to reflect capabilities in real-world scenarios.
However, existing datasets may face issues related to data
bias, deficiency, quality, and credibility. First, most well-
constructed benchmarks are concentrated on some widely-
investigated SE tasks ( e.g., HumanEval and CoderEval in
code generation), while lacking in other less-explored tasks
like unit test generation. Second, the majority of existing
evaluation dimensions focus primarily on performance met-
rics (e.g., Pass-1 in code generation), paying little attention
to other critical attributes of LLMs, such as time efficiency
and robustness.
We recommend that future work can be directed in the
following two areas. First, to address the limitation in task
scope, researchers can build diversified benchmarks to eval-
uate LLMs in emerging fields, such as unit test generation.
Second, to address the limitations in evaluation dimensions,
new metrics, and specialized benchmarks should be intro-
duced to assess some crucial aspects, such as robustness and
efficiency.
Beyond Text-based LLMs for Vision-based SE . In the
realm of SE, a predominant focus has been observed on
LLMs that process text-based inputs, i.e., natural language
and source code, significantly benefiting a multitude of
code-related tasks. However, alternative forms of input play
an equally crucial role in SE tasks, notably images in mobile
applications. For example, the graphical user interface has
emerged as a crucial component of mobile applications,
attracting substantial research attention in the area of GUI
testing. Recently, with advancements in computer vision
technologies, vision-based GUI testing approaches have
been developed and have shown promising progress.
We suggest that future works focus on the utilization of
multi-modal LLMs in version-based SE tasks. For example,
it is potential to combine both text and image understanding
capabilities of multi-modal LLMs to better capture the syn-
tax and semantic information about source code, test scripts,
and test reports in GUI testing, so as to benefit several tasks,
e.g., GUI test generation, GUI test record, and replay.
Explainable LLM-based Research . Existing LLMs usu-
ally address SE tasks in a black-box manner due to the
inherent limitations of DL and the vast parameters of LLMs.
The developers are unaware of why LLMs generate the
predictions, thus unsure about the reliability of these results,
hindering the adoption of LLM in practice. In the literature,
a majority of studies focus on improving the performance
of pre-defined metrics ( e.g., accuracy and precision), while
minor focus on improving the explainability of such LLMs.
Traditional rule-based SE approaches rely on pre-defined
rules and logic, which makes them more interpretable and
offers more transparency.
In the future, advanced explainable techniques can be
considered to make the predictions of LLMs more prac-
tical, explainable, and actionable. We suggest that future
work should concentrate on two aspects to support the
understanding of LLMs for SE research. First, it is possible
to incorporate XAI techniques to elucidate the decision-
making process of LLMs, such as designing strategies to
trace back the decision process to specific data points or
model components. Second, developing hybrid frameworks
that combine the interpretability of traditional rule-based
approaches with the predictive power of LLMs could help
in bridging the gap between traditional SE approaches and
advanced LLMs, providing a balance between transparency
and performance.

--- PDF PAGE 30 ---
30
7 C ONCLUSION
Large language models (LLMs) are bringing significant
changes to the software engineering (SE) field, with their
ability to handle complex code-related tasks poised to fun-
damentally reshape numerous SE practices and approaches.
In this paper, we provide a comprehensive survey of exist-
ing LLM-based SE studies from both the LLM and SE per-
spectives. We summarize 62 representative LLMs of Code
and discuss their distinct architectures, pre-training objec-
tives, downstream tasks, and open science. We illustrate the
wide range of SE tasks where LLMs have been applied,
involving 947 relevant studies for 112 code-related tasks
across five crucial SE phases. We highlight several crucial as-
pects of the optimization and application for the LLM-based
SE research, including empirical evaluation, security and
reliability, domain tuning, and compressing and distillation.
Finally, we point out several challenges (such as the data
leakage issue) and provide possible directions for future
study. Overall, our work serves as a roadmap for promising
future research and is valuable to both researchers and
practitioners, assisting them in leveraging LLMs to improve
existing SE practices.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Biolchini, P . G. Mian, A. C. C. Natali, and G. H. Travassos,
“Systematic review in software engineering,” System engineering
and computer science department COPPE/UFRJ, Technical Report ES,
vol. 679, no. 05, p. 45, 2005.
[2] M. V . Zelkowitz, “Perspectives in software engineering,” ACM
Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 197–216, 1978.
[3] Y. Yang, X. Xia, D. Lo, and J. Grundy, “A survey on deep learn-
ing for software engineering,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) ,
vol. 54, no. 10s, pp. 1–73, 2022.
[4] J. Wang, Y. Huang, C. Chen, Z. Liu, S. Wang, and Q. Wang,
“Software testing with large language model: Survey, landscape,
and vision,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.07221, 2023.
[5] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “Bert: Pre-
training of deep bidirectional transformers for language under-
standing,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
[6] C. Raffel, N. Shazeer, A. Roberts, K. Lee, S. Narang, M. Matena,
Y. Zhou, W. Li, and P . J. Liu, “Exploring the limits of transfer
learning with a unified text-to-text transformer,” The Journal of
Machine Learning Research, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 5485–5551, 2020.
[7] A. Radford, J. Wu, R. Child, D. Luan, D. Amodei, I. Sutskever
et al. , “Language models are unsupervised multitask learners,”
OpenAI blog, vol. 1, no. 8, p. 9, 2019.
[8] Z. Feng, D. Guo, D. Tang, N. Duan, X. Feng, M. Gong, L. Shou,
B. Qin, T. Liu, D. Jiang et al. , “Codebert: A pre-trained model
for programming and natural languages,” in Findings of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020 , 2020, pp.
1536–1547.
[9] Y. Wang, W. Wang, S. Joty, and S. C. Hoi, “Codet5: Identifier-
aware unified pre-trained encoder-decoder models for code un-
derstanding and generation,” in Proceedings of the 2021 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP’21) ,
2021, pp. 8696–8708.
[10] OpenAI, “Chatgpt: Optimizing language models for dialogue,”
https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt, 2023.
[11] C. S. Xia, Y. Wei, and L. Zhang, “Automated program repair in
the era of large pre-trained language models,” inProceedings of the
45th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE 2023).
Association for Computing Machinery, 2023.
[12] Q. Zhang, C. Fang, B. Yu, W. Sun, T. Zhang, and Z. Chen, “Pre-
trained model-based automated software vulnerability repair:
How far are we?” IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure
Computing, 2023.
[13] C. S. Xia and L. Zhang, “Less training, more repairing please:
revisiting automated program repair via zero-shot learning,” in
Proceedings of the 30th ACM Joint European Software Engineering
Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineer-
ing, 2022, pp. 959–971.
[14] D. Fried, A. Aghajanyan, J. Lin, S. Wang, E. Wallace, F. Shi,
R. Zhong, W.-t. Yih, L. Zettlemoyer, and M. Lewis, “Incoder: A
generative model for code infilling and synthesis,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2204.05999, 2022.
[15] Y. Wu, N. Jiang, H. V . Pham, T. Lutellier, J. Davis, L. Tan,
P . Babkin, and S. Shah, “How effective are neural networks for
fixing security vulnerabilities,” in Proceedings of the 32nd ACM
SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis,
ser. ISSTA 2023. Association for Computing Machinery, 2023,
pp. 1282–1294.
[16] W. Yuan, Q. Zhang, T. He, C. Fang, N. Q. V . Hung, X. Hao,
and H. Yin, “Circle: Continual repair across programming lan-
guages,” in Proceedings of the 31st ACM SIGSOFT International
Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis, 2022, pp. 678–690.
[17] N. Nashid, M. Sintaha, and A. Mesbah, “Retrieval-based prompt
selection for code-related few-shot learning,” in Proceedings of
the 45th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE’23),
2023.
[18] Q. Zhang, C. Fang, T. Zhang, B. Yu, W. Sun, and Z. Chen,
“Gamma: Revisiting template-based automated program repair
via mask prediction,” in 2023 38th IEEE/ACM International Con-
ference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE) . IEEE, 2023, pp.
535–547.
[19] C. Watson, N. Cooper, D. N. Palacio, K. Moran, and D. Poshy-
vanyk, “A systematic literature review on the use of deep
learning in software engineering research,” ACM Transactions on
Software Engineering and Methodology (TOSEM), vol. 31, no. 2, pp.
1–58, 2022.
[20] S. Wang, L. Huang, A. Gao, J. Ge, T. Zhang, H. Feng, I. Satyarth,
M. Li, H. Zhang, and V . Ng, “Machine/deep learning for software
engineering: A systematic literature review,”IEEE Transactions on
Software Engineering, vol. 49, no. 3, pp. 1188–1231, 2022.
[21] C. Niu, C. Li, B. Luo, and V . Ng, “Deep learning meets software
engineering: A survey on pre-trained models of source code,”
in Proceedings of the Thirty-First International Joint Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, 2022, pp. 5546–5555.
[22] D. Zan, B. Chen, F. Zhang, D. Lu, B. Wu, B. Guan, W. Yongji,
and J.-G. Lou, “Large language models meet nl2code: A survey,”
in Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , 2023, pp. 7443–
7464.
[23] A. Fan, B. Gokkaya, M. Harman, M. Lyubarskiy, S. Sengupta,
S. Yoo, and J. M. Zhang, “Large language models for soft-
ware engineering: Survey and open problems,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.03533, 2023.
[24] X. Hou, Y. Zhao, Y. Liu, Z. Yang, K. Wang, L. Li, X. Luo,
D. Lo, J. Grundy, and H. Wang, “Large language models for soft-
ware engineering: A systematic literature review,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2308.10620, 2023.
[25] H. Zhang, M. A. Babar, and P . Tell, “Identifying relevant stud-
ies in software engineering,” Information and Software Technology
(IST), vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 625–637, 2011.
[26] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N.
Gomez, Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,”
Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 30, 2017.
[27] Z. Wang, M. Yan, J. Chen, S. Liu, and D. Zhang, “Deep learning
library testing via effective model generation,” in Proceedings of
the 28th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Con-
ference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering ,
2020, pp. 788–799.
[28] Q. Zhang, C. Fang, Y. Ma, W. Sun, and Z. Chen, “A survey of
learning-based automated program repair,” ACM Transactions on
Software Engineering and Methodology, vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 1–69, 2023.
[29] A. Kanade, P . Maniatis, G. Balakrishnan, and K. Shi, “Learning
and evaluating contextual embedding of source code,” in Interna-
tional conference on machine learning. PMLR, 2020, pp. 5110–5121.
[30] D. Guo, S. Ren, S. Lu, Z. Feng, D. Tang, S. Liu, L. Zhou, N. Duan,
A. Svyatkovskiy, S. Fu et al., “Graphcodebert: Pre-training code
representations with data flow,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.08366 ,
2020.
[31] M. Mukherjee and V . J. Hellendoorn, “Stack over-flowing with

--- PDF PAGE 31 ---
31
results: the case for domain-specific pre-training over one-size-
fits-all models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03268, 2023.
[32] J. Lin, H. Dong, Y. Xie, and L. Zhang, “Scaling laws behind code
understanding model,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.12813, 2024.
[33] C. B. Clement, D. Drain, J. Timcheck, A. Svyatkovskiy, and
N. Sundaresan, “Pymt5: multi-mode translation of natural lan-
guage and python code with transformers,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2010.03150, 2020.
[34] A. Mastropaolo, S. Scalabrino, N. Cooper, D. N. Palacio,
D. Poshyvanyk, R. Oliveto, and G. Bavota, “Studying the usage
of text-to-text transfer transformer to support code-related tasks,”
in 2021 IEEE/ACM 43rd International Conference on Software Engi-
neering (ICSE). IEEE, 2021, pp. 336–347.
[35] W. U. Ahmad, S. Chakraborty, B. Ray, and K.-W. Chang, “Unified
pre-training for program understanding and generation,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2103.06333, 2021.
[36] D. Guo, S. Lu, N. Duan, Y. Wang, M. Zhou, and J. Yin, “Unix-
coder: Unified cross-modal pre-training for code representation,”
in Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , 2022, pp. 7212–
7225.
[37] C. Niu, C. Li, V . Ng, J. Ge, L. Huang, and B. Luo, “Spt-code:
sequence-to-sequence pre-training for learning source code rep-
resentations,” in Proceedings of the 44th International Conference on
Software Engineering, 2022, pp. 2006–2018.
[38] H. Le, Y. Wang, A. D. Gotmare, S. Savarese, and S. C. H. Hoi,
“Coderl: Mastering code generation through pretrained models
and deep reinforcement learning,” Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, vol. 35, pp. 21 314–21 328, 2022.
[39] J. Zhang, S. Panthaplackel, P . Nie, J. J. Li, and M. Gligoric,
“Coditt5: Pretraining for source code and natural language edit-
ing,” in 37th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated
Software Engineering, 2022, pp. 1–12.
[40] Y. Li, D. Choi, J. Chung, N. Kushman, J. Schrittwieser, R. Leblond,
T. Eccles, J. Keeling, F. Gimeno, A. Dal Lago et al., “Competition-
level code generation with alphacode,” Science, vol. 378, no. 6624,
pp. 1092–1097, 2022.
[41] Y. Wang, H. Le, A. D. Gotmare, N. D. Bui, J. Li, and S. C. Hoi,
“Codet5+: Open code large language models for code under-
standing and generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.07922, 2023.
[42] S. Chandel, C. B. Clement, G. Serrato, and N. Sundaresan, “Train-
ing and evaluating a jupyter notebook data science assistant,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.12901, 2022.
[43] Y. Chai, S. Wang, C. Pang, Y. Sun, H. Tian, and H. Wu, “Ernie-
code: Beyond english-centric cross-lingual pretraining for pro-
gramming languages,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.06742, 2022.
[44] P . Shojaee, A. Jain, S. Tipirneni, and C. K. Reddy, “Execution-
based code generation using deep reinforcement learning,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2301.13816, 2023.
[45] J. Liu, Y. Zhu, K. Xiao, Q. Fu, X. Han, W. Yang, and D. Ye, “Rltf:
Reinforcement learning from unit test feedback,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.04349, 2023.
[46] B. Lin, S. Wang, Z. Liu, Y. Liu, X. Xia, and X. Mao, “Cct5:
A code-change-oriented pre-trained model,” in Proceedings of
the 31st ACM Joint European Software Engineering Conference and
Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering , 2023, pp.
1509–1521.
[47] Z. Yu, Y. Tao, L. Chen, T. Sun, and H. Yang, “B-coder: Value-based
deep reinforcement learning for program synthesis.” CoRR, 2023.
[48] L. Gong, M. Elhoushi, and A. Cheung, “Ast-t5: Structure-
aware pretraining for code generation and understanding,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2401.03003, 2024.
[49] Q. Zhu, Q. Liang, Z. Sun, Y. Xiong, L. Zhang, and S. Cheng,
“Grammart5: Grammar-integrated pretrained encoder-decoder
neural model for code,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 46th
International Conference on Software Engineering, 2024, pp. 1–13.
[50] A. Svyatkovskiy, S. K. Deng, S. Fu, and N. Sundaresan, “Intel-
licode compose: Code generation using transformer,” in Proceed-
ings of the 28th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering
Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineer-
ing, 2020, pp. 1433–1443.
[51] S. Lu, D. Guo, S. Ren, J. Huang, A. Svyatkovskiy, A. Blanco, C. B.
Clement, D. Drain, D. Jiang, D. Tang, G. Li, L. Zhou, L. Shou,
L. Zhou, M. Tufano, M. Gong, M. Zhou, N. Duan, N. Sundaresan,
S. K. Deng, S. Fu, and S. Liu, “Codexglue: A machine learning
benchmark dataset for code understanding and generation,” in
Proceedings of the Neural Information Processing Systems Track on
Datasets and Benchmarks 1, NeurIPS Datasets and Benchmarks 2021,
December 2021, virtual, J. Vanschoren and S. Yeung, Eds., 2021.
[52] M. Chen, J. Tworek, H. Jun, Q. Yuan, H. P . d. O. Pinto, J. Kaplan,
H. Edwards, Y. Burda, N. Joseph, G. Brockman et al. , “Eval-
uating large language models trained on code,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2107.03374, 2021.
[53] F. F. Xu, U. Alon, G. Neubig, and V . J. Hellendoorn, “A systematic
evaluation of large language models of code,” in Proceedings
of the 6th ACM SIGPLAN International Symposium on Machine
Programming, 2022, pp. 1–10.
[54] E. Nijkamp, B. Pang, H. Hayashi, L. Tu, H. Wang, Y. Zhou,
S. Savarese, and C. Xiong, “Codegen: An open large language
model for code with multi-turn program synthesis,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2203.13474, 2022.
[55] D. Zan, B. Chen, D. Yang, Z. Lin, M. Kim, B. Guan, Y. Wang,
W. Chen, and J.-G. Lou, “Cert: Continual pre-training on
sketches for library-oriented code generation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2206.06888, 2022.
[56] L. B. Allal, R. Li, D. Kocetkov, C. Mou, C. Akiki, C. M. Ferrandis,
N. Muennighoff, M. Mishra, A. Gu, M. Dey et al. , “Santacoder:
don’t reach for the stars!” arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.03988, 2023.
[57] R. Li, L. B. Allal, Y. Zi, N. Muennighoff, D. Kocetkov, C. Mou,
M. Marone, C. Akiki, J. Li, J. Chim et al. , “Starcoder: may the
source be with you!” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06161, 2023.
[58] F. Christopoulou, G. Lampouras, M. Gritta, G. Zhang, Y. Guo,
Z. Li, Q. Zhang, M. Xiao, B. Shen, L. Li et al., “Pangu-coder: Pro-
gram synthesis with function-level language modeling,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2207.11280, 2022.
[59] B. Shen, J. Zhang, T. Chen, D. Zan, B. Geng, A. Fu, M. Zeng, A. Yu,
J. Ji, J. Zhaoet al., “Pangu-coder2: Boosting large language models
for code with ranking feedback,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.14936,
2023.
[60] A. Chowdhery, S. Narang, J. Devlin, M. Bosma, G. Mishra,
A. Roberts, P . Barham, H. W. Chung, C. Sutton, S. Gehrmann
et al., “Palm: Scaling language modeling with pathways,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.
[61] Q. Zheng, X. Xia, X. Zou, Y. Dong, S. Wang, Y. Xue, Z. Wang,
L. Shen, A. Wang, Y. Liet al., “Codegeex: A pre-trained model for
code generation with multilingual evaluations on humaneval-x,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17568, 2023.
[62] E. Nijkamp, H. Hayashi, C. Xiong, S. Savarese, and Y. Zhou,
“Codegen2: Lessons for training llms on programming and nat-
ural languages,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.02309, 2023.
[63] H. Touvron, T. Lavril, G. Izacard, X. Martinet, M.-A. Lachaux,
T. Lacroix, B. Rozi `ere, N. Goyal, E. Hambro, F. Azhar et al. ,
“Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
[64] T. Le Scao, A. Fan, C. Akiki, E. Pavlick, S. Ili ´c, D. Hesslow,
R. Castagn ´e, A. S. Luccioni, F. Yvon, M. Gall ´e et al. , “Bloom: A
176b-parameter open-access multilingual language model,” 2023.
[65] P . Di, J. Li, H. Yu, W. Jiang, W. Cai, Y. Cao, C. Chen, D. Chen,
H. Chen, L. Chen et al. , “Codefuse-13b: A pretrained multi-
lingual code large language model,” in Proceedings of the 46th In-
ternational Conference on Software Engineering: Software Engineering
in Practice, 2024, pp. 418–429.
[66] R. Xie, Z. Zeng, Z. Yu, C. Gao, S. Zhang, and W. Ye, “Codeshell
technical report,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.15747, 2024.
[67] Y. Xu, H. Su, C. Xing, B. Mi, Q. Liu, W. Shi, B. Hui, F. Zhou, Y. Liu,
T. Xie et al., “Lemur: Harmonizing natural language and code for
language agents,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06830, 2023.
[68] Y. Wei, Z. Wang, J. Liu, Y. Ding, and L. Zhang, “Magicoder:
Empowering code generation with oss-instruct,” in Forty-first
International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
[69] N. Muennighoff, Q. Liu, A. Zebaze, Q. Zheng, B. Hui, T. Y. Zhuo,
S. Singh, X. Tang, L. Von Werra, and S. Longpre, “Octopack:
Instruction tuning code large language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2308.07124, 2023.
[70] Z. Luo, C. Xu, P . Zhao, Q. Sun, X. Geng, W. Hu, C. Tao,
J. Ma, Q. Lin, and D. Jiang, “Wizardcoder: Empowering
code large language models with evol-instruct,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2306.08568, 2023.
[71] Z. Song, Y. Wang, W. Zhang, K. Liu, C. Lyu, D. Song, Q. Guo,
H. Yan, D. Lin, K. Chen et al. , “Alchemistcoder: Harmonizing
and eliciting code capability by hindsight tuning on multi-source
data,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.19265, 2024.

--- PDF PAGE 32 ---
32
[72] B. Lei, Y. Li, and Q. Chen, “Autocoder: Enhancing code large
language model with \textsc {AIEV-Instruct},” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2405.14906, 2024.
[73] C. Team, “Codegemma: Open code models based on gemma,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.11409, 2024.
[74] D. Guo, Q. Zhu, D. Yang, Z. Xie, K. Dong, W. Zhang, G. Chen,
X. Bi, Y. Wu, Y. Li et al. , “Deepseek-coder: When the large lan-
guage model meets programming–the rise of code intelligence,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.14196, 2024.
[75] Q. Zhu, D. Guo, Z. Shao, D. Yang, P . Wang, R. Xu, Y. Wu, Y. Li,
H. Gao, S. Ma et al. , “Deepseek-coder-v2: Breaking the barrier
of closed-source models in code intelligence,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.11931, 2024.
[76] Y. Wang, K. He, G. Dong, P . Wang, W. Zeng, M. Diao, Y. Mou,
M. Zhang, J. Wang, X. Cai et al. , “Dolphcoder: Echo-locating
code large language models with diverse and multi-objective
instruction tuning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.09136, 2024.
[77] M. Mishra, M. Stallone, G. Zhang, Y. Shen, A. Prasad, A. M.
Soria, M. Merler, P . Selvam, S. Surendran, S. Singhet al., “Granite
code models: A family of open foundation models for code
intelligence,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.04324, 2024.
[78] Y. Ding, J. Liu, Y. Wei, T. Y. Zhuo, and L. Zhang, “Xft: Unlocking
the power of code instruction tuning by simply merging upcy-
cled mixture-of-experts,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.15247, 2024.
[79] Y. Wu, D. Huang, W. Shi, W. Wang, L. Gao, S. Liu, Z. Nan,
K. Yuan, R. Zhang, X. Zhang et al. , “Inversecoder: Unleashing
the power of instruction-tuned code llms with inverse-instruct,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.05700, 2024.
[80] K. Rathinasamy, A. Kumar, G. Gayari, R. A. Mondal, S. Singh
et al. , “Narrow transformer: Starcoder-based java-lm for desk-
top,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.03941, 2024.
[81] A. Lozhkov, R. Li, L. B. Allal, F. Cassano, J. Lamy-Poirier, N. Tazi,
A. Tang, D. Pykhtar, J. Liu, Y. Weiet al., “Starcoder 2 and the stack
v2: The next generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.19173, 2024.
[82] T. Sun, L. Chai, J. Yang, Y. Yin, H. Guo, J. Liu, B. Wang, L. Yang,
and Z. Li, “Unicoder: Scaling code large language model via
universal code,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.16441, 2024.
[83] Z. Yu, X. Zhang, N. Shang, Y. Huang, C. Xu, Y. Zhao, W. Hu, and
Q. Yin, “Wavecoder: Widespread and versatile enhancement for
code large language models by instruction tuning,” inProceedings
of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), 2024, pp. 5140–5153.
[84] W. X. Zhao, K. Zhou, J. Li, T. Tang, X. Wang, Y. Hou, Y. Min,
B. Zhang, J. Zhang, Z. Dong et al., “A survey of large language
models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.18223, 2023.
[85] S. Yin, C. Fu, S. Zhao, K. Li, X. Sun, T. Xu, and E. Chen, “A
survey on multimodal large language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2306.13549, 2023.
[86] B. Roziere, J. Gehring, F. Gloeckle, S. Sootla, I. Gat, X. E. Tan,
Y. Adi, J. Liu, T. Remez, J. Rapin et al. , “Code llama: Open
foundation models for code,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12950 ,
2023.
[87] K. Clark, M.-T. Luong, Q. V . Le, and C. D. Manning, “Electra: Pre-
training text encoders as discriminators rather than generators,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.10555, 2020.
[88] D. Xie, B. Yoo, N. Jiang, M. Kim, L. Tan, X. Zhang, and J. S.
Lee, “Impact of large language models on generating software
specifications,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03324, 2023.
[89] L. Ma, S. Liu, Y. Li, X. Xie, and L. Bu, “Specgen: Automated
generation of formal program specifications via large language
models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.08807, 2024.
[90] S. Mandal, A. Chethan, V . Janfaza, S. Mahmud, T. A. Anderson,
J. Turek, J. J. Tithi, and A. Muzahid, “Large language mod-
els based automatic synthesis of software specifications,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2304.09181, 2023.
[91] T. Hey, J. Keim, A. Koziolek, and W. F. Tichy, “Norbert: Trans-
fer learning for requirements classification,” in 2020 IEEE 28th
International Requirements Engineering Conference (RE) , 2020, pp.
169–179.
[92] M. A. Khan, M. S. Khan, I. Khan, S. Ahmad, and S. Huda, “Non
functional requirements identification and classification using
transfer learning model,” IEEE Access, 2023.
[93] K. Rahman, A. Ghani, A. Alzahrani, M. U. Tariq, and A. U.
Rahman, “Pre-trained model-based nfr classification: Overcom-
ing limited data challenges,” IEEE Access, 2023.
[94] L. Han, Q. Zhou, and T. Li, “Improving requirements classifi-
cation models based on explainable requirements concerns,” in
2023 IEEE 31st International Requirements Engineering Conference
Workshops (REW). IEEE, 2023, pp. 95–101.
[95] S. Lubos, A. Felfernig, T. N. T. Tran, D. Garber, M. El Mansi, S. P .
Erdeniz, and V .-M. Le, “Leveraging llms for the quality assur-
ance of software requirements,” in 2024 IEEE 32nd International
Requirements Engineering Conference (RE) . IEEE, 2024, pp. 389–
397.
[96] A.-R. Preda, C. Mayr-Dorn, A. Mashkoor, and A. Egyed, “Sup-
porting high-level to low-level requirements coverage reviewing
with large language models,” in Proceedings of the 21st Interna-
tional Conference on Mining Software Repositories , 2024, pp. 242–
253.
[97] A. Poudel, J. Lin, and J. Cleland-Huang, “Leveraging
transformer-based language models to automate requirements
satisfaction assessment,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.04463, 2023.
[98] K. Ronanki, B. Cabrero-Daniel, and C. Berger, “Chatgpt as a tool
for user story quality evaluation: Trustworthy out of the box?” in
International Conference on Agile Software Development . Springer,
2022, pp. 173–181.
[99] M. R. Hasan, J. Li, I. Ahmed, and H. Bagheri, “Automated repair
of declarative software specifications in the era of large language
models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.12425, 2023.
[100] A. Moharil and A. Sharma, “Tabasco: A transformer based con-
textualization toolkit,” Science of Computer Programming, vol. 230,
p. 102994, 2023.
[101] ——, “Identification of intra-domain ambiguity using
transformer-based machine learning,” in Proceedings of the
1st International Workshop on Natural Language-based Software
Engineering, 2022, pp. 51–58.
[102] S. Ezzini, S. Abualhaija, C. Arora, and M. Sabetzadeh, “Auto-
mated handling of anaphoric ambiguity in requirements: a multi-
solution study,” in Proceedings of the 44th International Conference
on Software Engineering, 2022, pp. 187–199.
[103] G. Sridhara, S. Mazumdar et al. , “Chatgpt: A study on its util-
ity for ubiquitous software engineering tasks,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.16837, 2023.
[104] K. Kolthoff, C. Bartelt, and S. P . Ponzetto, “Data-driven prototyp-
ing via natural-language-based gui retrieval,” Automated software
engineering, vol. 30, no. 1, p. 13, 2023.
[105] P . Brie, N. Burny, A. Slu¨yters, and J. Vanderdonckt, “Evaluating a
large language model on searching for gui layouts,” Proceedings
of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction , vol. 7, no. EICS, pp.
1–37, 2023.
[106] Z. Li, S. Dutta, and M. Naik, “Llm-assisted static analysis for de-
tecting security vulnerabilities,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.17238 ,
2024.
[107] D. Luitel, S. Hassani, and M. Sabetzadeh, “Improving require-
ments completeness: Automated assistance through large lan-
guage models,” Requirements Engineering, vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 73–95,
2024.
[108] S. Ren, H. Nakagawa, and T. Tsuchiya, “Combining prompts with
examples to enhance llm-based requirement elicitation,” in 2024
IEEE 48th Annual Computers, Software, and Applications Conference
(COMPSAC). IEEE, 2024, pp. 1376–1381.
[109] M. A. Sami, Z. Rasheed, M. Waseem, Z. Zhang, T. Herda, and
P . Abrahamsson, “Prioritizing software requirements using large
language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.01564, 2024.
[110] C. Jain, P . R. Anish, A. Singh, and S. Ghaisas, “A transformer-
based approach for abstractive summarization of requirements
from obligations in software engineering contracts,” in 2023 IEEE
31st International Requirements Engineering Conference (RE). IEEE,
2023, pp. 169–179.
[111] J. L. Guo, J.-P . Stegh ¨ofer, A. Vogelsang, and J. Cleland-Huang,
“Natural language processing for requirements traceability,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.10845, 2024.
[112] J. Lin, Y. Liu, Q. Zeng, M. Jiang, and J. Cleland-Huang, “Traceabil-
ity transformed: Generating more accurate links with pre-trained
bert models,” in 2021 IEEE/ACM 43rd International Conference on
Software Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 2021, pp. 324–335.
[113] M. B. Chaaben, L. Burgue ˜no, and H. Sahraoui, “Towards using
few-shot prompt learning for automating model completion,” in
2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference on Software Engineer-
ing: New Ideas and Emerging Results (ICSE-NIER). IEEE, 2023, pp.
7–12.
[114] A. Ferrari, S. Abualhaija, and C. Arora, “Model generation from
requirements with llms: an exploratory study,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.06371, 2024.

--- PDF PAGE 33 ---
33
[115] S. Zhang, J. Wang, G. Dong, J. Sun, Y. Zhang, and G. Pu,
“Experimenting a new programming practice with llms,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2401.01062, 2024.
[116] G. Yang, Y. Zhou, X. Chen, X. Zhang, Y. Xu, T. Han, and T. Chen,
“A syntax-guided multi-task learning approach for turducken-
style code generation,” Empirical Software Engineering , vol. 28,
no. 6, p. 141, 2023.
[117] X. Jiang, Y. Dong, L. Wang, F. Zheng, Q. Shang, G. Li, Z. Jin,
and W. Jiao, “Self-planning code generation with large language
models,” ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodol-
ogy.
[118] S. Zhang, Z. Chen, Y. Shen, M. Ding, J. B. Tenenbaum, and C. Gan,
“Planning with large language models for code generation,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.05510, 2023.
[119] H. Han, J. Kim, J. Yoo, Y. Lee, and S.-w. Hwang, “Archcode:
Incorporating software requirements in code generation with
large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00994, 2024.
[120] F. Mu, L. Shi, S. Wang, Z. Yu, B. Zhang, C. Wang, S. Liu,
and Q. Wang, “Clarifygpt: Empowering llm-based code genera-
tion with intention clarification,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.10996,
2023.
[121] J. Li, Y. Zhao, Y. Li, G. Li, and Z. Jin, “Acecoder: An effec-
tive prompting technique specialized in code generation,” ACM
Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, 2024.
[122] A. Ni, S. Iyer, D. Radev, V . Stoyanov, W.-t. Yih, S. Wang, and
X. V . Lin, “Lever: Learning to verify language-to-code generation
with execution,” in International Conference on Machine Learning .
PMLR, 2023, pp. 26 106–26 128.
[123] X. Chen, M. Lin, N. Sch ¨arli, and D. Zhou, “Teaching large
language models to self-debug,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05128,
2023.
[124] A. Chen, J. Scheurer, T. Korbak, J. A. Campos, J. S. Chan, S. R.
Bowman, K. Cho, and E. Perez, “Improving code generation
by training with natural language feedback,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.16749, 2023.
[125] K. Zhang, Z. Li, J. Li, G. Li, and Z. Jin, “Self-edit: Fault-aware
code editor for code generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.04087,
2023.
[126] Y. Dong, X. Jiang, Z. Jin, and G. Li, “Self-collaboration
code generation via chatgpt,” ACM Trans. Softw. Eng.
Methodol., jun 2024, just Accepted. [Online]. Available: https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3672459
[127] A. Mastropaolo, L. Pascarella, E. Guglielmi, M. Ciniselli, S. Scal-
abrino, R. Oliveto, and G. Bavota, “On the robustness of code
generation techniques: An empirical study on github copilot,” in
2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference on Software Engineer-
ing (ICSE). IEEE, 2023, pp. 2149–2160.
[128] L. Zhong and Z. Wang, “Can llm replace stack overflow? a
study on robustness and reliability of large language model code
generation,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, vol. 38, no. 19, 2024, pp. 21 841–21 849.
[129] T. Coignion, C. Quinton, and R. Rouvoy, “A performance study
of llm-generated code on leetcode,” in Proceedings of the 28th
International Conference on Evaluation and Assessment in Software
Engineering, 2024, pp. 79–89.
[130] K. Jin, C.-Y. Wang, H. V . Pham, and H. Hemmati, “Can chatgpt
support developers? an empirical evaluation of large language
models for code generation,” in 2024 IEEE/ACM 21st International
Conference on Mining Software Repositories (MSR). IEEE, 2024, pp.
167–171.
[131] Y. Feng, S. Vanam, M. Cherukupally, W. Zheng, M. Qiu, and
H. Chen, “Investigating code generation performance of chatgpt
with crowdsourcing social data,” in 2023 IEEE 47th Annual Com-
puters, Software, and Applications Conference (COMPSAC) . IEEE,
2023, pp. 876–885.
[132] B. Kou, S. Chen, Z. Wang, L. Ma, and T. Zhang, “Do large
language models pay similar attention like human programmers
when generating code?” Proc. ACM Softw. Eng. , vol. 1, no. FSE,
2024. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3660807
[133] C. Liu, X. Bao, H. Zhang, N. Zhang, H. Hu, X. Zhang, and
M. Yan, “Guiding chatgpt for better code generation: An em-
pirical study,” in 2024 IEEE International Conference on Software
Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering (SANER) . IEEE, 2024, pp.
102–113.
[134] D. Yan, Z. Gao, and Z. Liu, “A closer look at different diffi-
culty levels code generation abilities of chatgpt,” in 2023 38th
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engi-
neering (ASE). IEEE, 2023, pp. 1887–1898.
[135] C. Liu, X. Bao, H. Zhang, N. Zhang, H. Hu, X. Zhang, and M. Yan,
“Improving chatgpt prompt for code generation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.08360, 2023.
[136] F. Cassano, J. Gouwar, D. Nguyen, S. Nguyen, L. Phipps-Costin,
D. Pinckney, M.-H. Yee, Y. Zi, C. J. Anderson, M. Q. Feldmanet al.,
“Multipl-e: a scalable and polyglot approach to benchmarking
neural code generation,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineer-
ing, vol. 49, no. 7, pp. 3675–3691, 2023.
[137] H. Yu, B. Shen, D. Ran, J. Zhang, Q. Zhang, Y. Ma, G. Liang, Y. Li,
Q. Wang, and T. Xie, “Codereval: A benchmark of pragmatic code
generation with generative pre-trained models,” in Proceedings of
the 46th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineer-
ing, 2024, pp. 1–12.
[138] M. Chen, H. Zhang, C. Wan, Z. Wei, Y. Xu, J. Wang, and
X. Gu, “On the effectiveness of large language models in domain-
specific code generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.01639, 2023.
[139] B. Kou, S. Chen, Z. Wang, L. Ma, and T. Zhang, “Do large
language models pay similar attention like human programmers
when generating code?” Proceedings of the ACM on Software Engi-
neering, vol. 1, no. FSE, pp. 2261–2284, 2024.
[140] R. Bairi, A. Sonwane, A. Kanade, A. Iyer, S. Parthasarathy, S. Raja-
mani, B. Ashok, and S. Shet, “Codeplan: Repository-level coding
using llms and planning,” Proceedings of the ACM on Software
Engineering, vol. 1, no. FSE, pp. 675–698, 2024.
[141] Z. Ma, S. An, B. Xie, and Z. Lin, “Compositional api recommen-
dation for library-oriented code generation,” in Proceedings of the
32nd IEEE/ACM International Conference on Program Comprehen-
sion, 2024, pp. 87–98.
[142] M. Liu, T. Yang, Y. Lou, X. Du, Y. Wang, and X. Peng, “Code-
gen4libs: A two-stage approach for library-oriented code gener-
ation,” in 2023 38th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Auto-
mated Software Engineering (ASE). IEEE, 2023, pp. 434–445.
[143] J. Li, Y. Li, G. Li, Z. Jin, Y. Hao, and X. Hu, “Skcoder: A
sketch-based approach for automatic code generation,” in 2023
IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference on Software Engineering
(ICSE). IEEE, 2023, pp. 2124–2135.
[144] F. Lin, D. J. Kim et al., “When llm-based code generation meets the
software development process,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.15852 ,
2024.
[145] D. Huang, Q. Bu, J. M. Zhang, M. Luck, and H. Cui, “Agentcoder:
Multi-agent-based code generation with iterative testing and
optimisation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.13010, 2023.
[146] K. Zhang, J. Li, G. Li, X. Shi, and Z. Jin, “Codeagent: En-
hancing code generation with tool-integrated agent systems
for real-world repo-level coding challenges,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2401.07339, 2024.
[147] J. Li, F. Liu, J. Li, Y. Zhao, G. Li, and Z. Jin, “Mcodesearcher:
Multi-view contrastive learning for code search,” in Proceedings
of the 14th Asia-Pacific Symposium on Internetware , 2023, pp. 270–
280.
[148] S. Liu, B. Wu, X. Xie, G. Meng, and Y. Liu, “Contrabert: Enhanc-
ing code pre-trained models via contrastive learning,” in 2023
IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference on Software Engineering
(ICSE). IEEE Computer Society, 2023, pp. 2476–2487.
[149] Z. Shi, Y. Xiong, X. Zhang, Y. Zhang, S. Li, and Y. Zhu, “Cross-
modal contrastive learning for code search,” in2022 IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Software Maintenance and Evolution (ICSME) .
IEEE, 2022, pp. 94–105.
[150] Z. Shi, Y. Xiong, Y. Zhang, Z. Jiang, J. Zhao, L. Wang, and
S. Li, “Improving code search with multi-modal momentum con-
trastive learning,” in 2023 IEEE/ACM 31st International Conference
on Program Comprehension (ICPC). IEEE, 2023, pp. 280–291.
[151] X. Li, Y. Gong, Y. Shen, X. Qiu, H. Zhang, B. Yao, W. Qi, D. Jiang,
W. Chen, and N. Duan, “Coderetriever: A large scale contrastive
pre-training method for code search,” in Proceedings of the 2022
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,
2022, pp. 2898–2910.
[152] E. Shi, Y. Wang, W. Gu, L. Du, H. Zhang, S. Han, D. Zhang,
and H. Sun, “Cocosoda: Effective contrastive learning for code
search,” in 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference on Soft-
ware Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 2023, pp. 2198–2210.
[153] P . Salza, C. Schwizer, J. Gu, and H. C. Gall, “On the effectiveness
of transfer learning for code search,”IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering, 2022.

--- PDF PAGE 34 ---
34
[154] K. Chi, C. Li, J. Ge, and B. Luo, “An empirical study on code
search pre-trained models: Academic progresses vs. industry
requirements,” in Proceedings of the 15th Asia-Pacific Symposium
on Internetware, 2024, pp. 41–50.
[155] Z. Yang, F. Liu, Z. Yu, J. W. Keung, J. Li, S. Liu, Y. Hong, X. Ma,
Z. Jin, and G. Li, “Exploring and unleashing the power of large
language models in automated code translation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.14646, 2024.
[156] B. Wang, R. Li, M. Li, and P . Saxena, “Transmap: Pinpointing mis-
takes in neural code translation,” in Proceedings of the 31st ACM
Joint European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on
the Foundations of Software Engineering, 2023, pp. 999–1011.
[157] R. Pan, A. R. Ibrahimzada, R. Krishna, D. Sankar, L. P . Wassi,
M. Merler, B. Sobolev, R. Pavuluri, S. Sinha, and R. Jabbarvand,
“Lost in translation: A study of bugs introduced by large lan-
guage models while translating code,” in 2024 IEEE/ACM 46th
International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) . IEEE,
2024, pp. 995–1007.
[158] M. Jiao, T. Yu, X. Li, G. Qiu, X. Gu, and B. Shen, “On the eval-
uation of neural code translation: Taxonomy and benchmark,”
in 2023 38th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated
Software Engineering (ASE). IEEE, 2023, pp. 1529–1541.
[159] J. Zhang, P . Nie, J. J. Li, and M. Gligoric, “Multilingual code
co-evolution using large language models,” in Proceedings of
the 31st ACM Joint European Software Engineering Conference and
Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering , 2023, pp.
695–707.
[160] A. Mastropaolo, E. Aghajani, L. Pascarella, and G. Bavota, “An
empirical study on code comment completion,” in 2021 IEEE
International Conference on Software Maintenance and Evolution (IC-
SME). IEEE, 2021, pp. 159–170.
[161] L. Li, B. Liang, L. Chen, and X. Zhang, “Cross-modal retrieval-
enhanced code summarization based on joint learning for re-
trieval and generation,” Information and Software Technology , vol.
175, p. 107527, 2024.
[162] C. Fang, W. Sun, Y. Chen, X. Chen, Z. Wei, Q. Zhang, Y. You,
B. Luo, Y. Liu, and Z. Chen, “Esale: Enhancing code-summary
alignment learning for source code summarization,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Software Engineering, 2024.
[163] D. Wang, B. Chen, S. Li, W. Luo, S. Peng, W. Dong, and X. Liao,
“One adapter for all programming languages? adapter tuning
for code search and summarization,” in 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th
International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) . IEEE,
2023, pp. 5–16.
[164] M. Geng, S. Wang, D. Dong, H. Wang, G. Li, Z. Jin, X. Mao,
and X. Liao, “Large language models are few-shot summarizers:
Multi-intent comment generation via in-context learning,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 46th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software
Engineering, 2024, pp. 1–13.
[165] C. Wang, Y. Lou, J. Liu, and X. Peng, “Generating variable expla-
nations via zero-shot prompt learning,” in 2023 38th IEEE/ACM
International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE) .
IEEE, 2023, pp. 748–760.
[166] T. Ahmed, K. S. Pai, P . Devanbu, and E. T. Barr, “Automatic
semantic augmentation of language model prompts (for code
summarization),” in 2024 IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference
on Software Engineering (ICSE). IEEE Computer Society, 2024, pp.
2720–2732.
[167] S. A. Rukmono, L. Ochoa, and M. R. Chaudron, “Achieving high-
level software component summarization via hierarchical chain-
of-thought prompting and static code analysis,” in 2023 IEEE
International Conference on Data and Software Engineering (ICoDSE).
IEEE, 2023, pp. 7–12.
[168] J. Li, Y. Zhang, Z. Karas, C. McMillan, K. Leach, and Y. Huang,
“Do machines and humans focus on similar code? exploring
explainability of large language models in code summarization,”
in Proceedings of the 32nd IEEE/ACM International Conference on
Program Comprehension, 2024, pp. 47–51.
[169] X. Jin and Z. Lin, “Simllm: Calculating semantic similarity in
code summaries using a large language model-based approach,”
Proceedings of the ACM on Software Engineering, vol. 1, no. FSE, pp.
1376–1399, 2024.
[170] X. Jin, J. Larson, W. Yang, and Z. Lin, “Binary code summa-
rization: Benchmarking chatgpt/gpt-4 and other large language
models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.09601, 2023.
[171] W. Sun, C. Fang, Y. You, Y. Miao, Y. Liu, Y. Li, G. Deng, S. Huang,
Y. Chen, Q. Zhang et al. , “Automatic code summarization via
chatgpt: How far are we?” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.12865, 2023.
[172] P . Nie, R. Banerjee, J. J. Li, R. J. Mooney, and M. Gligoric, “Learn-
ing deep semantics for test completion,” in 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th
International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) . IEEE,
2023, pp. 2111–2123.
[173] Z. Li, C. Wang, Z. Liu, H. Wang, D. Chen, S. Wang, and C. Gao,
“Cctest: Testing and repairing code completion systems,” in 2023
IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference on Software Engineering
(ICSE). IEEE, 2023, pp. 1238–1250.
[174] W. Liu, A. Yu, D. Zan, B. Shen, W. Zhang, H. Zhao, Z. Jin,
and Q. Wang, “Graphcoder: Enhancing repository-level code
completion via code context graph-based retrieval and language
model,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.07003, 2024.
[175] W. Cheng, Y. Wu, and W. Hu, “Dataflow-guided retrieval aug-
mentation for repository-level code completion,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2405.19782, 2024.
[176] D. Wu, W. U. Ahmad, D. Zhang, M. K. Ramanathan, and X. Ma,
“Repoformer: Selective retrieval for repository-level code com-
pletion,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.10059, 2024.
[177] H. N. Phan, H. N. Phan, T. N. Nguyen, and N. D. Bui, “Repo-
hyper: Better context retrieval is all you need for repository-level
code completion,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.06095, 2024.
[178] J. Liu, Y. Chen, M. Liu, X. Peng, and Y. Lou, “Stall+: Boosting
llm-based repository-level code completion with static analysis,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.10018, 2024.
[179] Y. Wang, Y. Wang, D. Guo, J. Chen, R. Zhang, Y. Ma, and
Z. Zheng, “Rlcoder: Reinforcement learning for repository-level
code completion,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.19487, 2024.
[180] M. Ciniselli, N. Cooper, L. Pascarella, D. Poshyvanyk,
M. Di Penta, and G. Bavota, “An empirical study on the usage
of bert models for code completion,” in 2021 IEEE/ACM 18th
International Conference on Mining Software Repositories (MSR) .
IEEE, 2021, pp. 108–119.
[181] M. Ciniselli, N. Cooper, L. Pascarella, A. Mastropaolo, E. Agha-
jani, D. Poshyvanyk, M. Di Penta, and G. Bavota, “An empirical
study on the usage of transformer models for code completion,”
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, vol. 48, no. 12, pp. 4818–
4837, 2021.
[182] T. van Dam, M. Izadi, and A. van Deursen, “Enriching source
code with contextual data for code completion models: An em-
pirical study,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.12269, 2023.
[183] N. Jain, S. Vaidyanath, A. Iyer, N. Natarajan, S. Parthasarathy,
S. Rajamani, and R. Sharma, “Jigsaw: Large language models
meet program synthesis,” in Proceedings of the 44th International
Conference on Software Engineering, 2022, pp. 1219–1231.
[184] V . Liventsev, A. Grishina, A. H ¨arm¨a, and L. Moonen, “Fully
autonomous programming with large language models,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2304.10423, 2023.
[185] D. Vella Zarb, G. Parks, and T. Kipouros, “Synergistic utilization
of llms for program synthesis,” in Proceedings of the Genetic and
Evolutionary Computation Conference Companion , 2024, pp. 539–
542.
[186] J. Li, G. Li, Z. Li, Z. Jin, X. Hu, K. Zhang, and Z. Fu, “Codeeditor:
Learning to edit source code with pre-trained models,” ACM
Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, vol. 32, no. 6,
pp. 1–22, 2023.
[187] P . Gupta, A. Khare, Y. Bajpai, S. Chakraborty, S. Gulwani,
A. Kanade, A. Radhakrishna, G. Soares, and A. Tiwari,
“Grace: Generation using associated code edits,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.14129, 2023.
[188] C. Liu, P . Cetin, Y. Patodia, B. Ray, S. Chakraborty, and Y. Ding,
“Automated code editing with search-generate-modify,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 2024 IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on
Software Engineering: Companion Proceedings, 2024, pp. 398–399.
[189] J. Y. Khan, M. T. I. Khondaker, G. Uddin, and A. Iqbal, “Auto-
matic detection of five api documentation smells: Practitioners’
perspectives,” in 2021 IEEE International Conference on Software
Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering (SANER) . IEEE, 2021, pp.
318–329.
[190] Q. Huang, Y. Wu, Z. Xing, H. Jiang, Y. Cheng, and H. Jin, “Adap-
tive intellect unleashed: The feasibility of knowledge transfer in
large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.04788, 2023.
[191] S. Wang, S. Jean, S. Sengupta, J. Gung, N. Pappas, and Y. Zhang,
“Measuring and mitigating constraint violations of in-context
learning for utterance-to-api semantic parsing,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.15338, 2023.

--- PDF PAGE 35 ---
35
[192] T. Y. Zhuo, X. Du, Z. Xing, J. Sun, H. Quan, L. Li, and L. Zhu, “Pop
quiz! do pre-trained code models possess knowledge of correct
api names?” arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.07804, 2023.
[193] Q. Huang, Z. Wan, Z. Xing, C. Wang, J. Chen, X. Xu, and
Q. Lu, “Let’s chat to find the apis: Connecting human, llm and
knowledge graph through ai chain,” in 2023 38th IEEE/ACM
International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE) .
IEEE, 2023, pp. 471–483.
[194] M. Wei, N. S. Harzevili, Y. Huang, J. Wang, and S. Wang, “Clear:
contrastive learning for api recommendation,” in Proceedings of
the 44th International Conference on Software Engineering , 2022, pp.
376–387.
[195] Z. Li, C. Li, Z. Tang, W. Huang, J. Ge, B. Luo, V . Ng, T. Wang,
Y. Hu, and X. Zhang, “Ptm-apirec: Leveraging pre-trained models
of source code in api recommendation,” ACM Transactions on
Software Engineering and Methodology, vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 1–30, 2024.
[196] K. Zhang, H. Zhang, G. Li, J. Li, Z. Li, and Z. Jin, “Toolcoder:
Teach code generation models to use api search tools,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2305.04032, 2023.
[197] Y. Chen, C. Gao, M. Zhu, Q. Liao, Y. Wang, and G. Xu, “Api-
gen: Generative api method recommendation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2401.15843, 2024.
[198] D. Wu, Y. Feng, H. Zhang, and B. Xu, “Automatic recognizing rel-
evant fragments of apis using api references,” Automated Software
Engineering, vol. 31, no. 1, p. 3, 2024.
[199] H. Gilbert, M. Sandborn, D. C. Schmidt, J. Spencer-Smith, and
J. White, “Semantic compression with large language models,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.12512, 2023.
[200] J. Von der Mosel, A. Trautsch, and S. Herbold, “On the validity
of pre-trained transformers for natural language processing in
the software engineering domain,” IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering, vol. 49, no. 4, pp. 1487–1507, 2022.
[201] Y. Lin, C. Wan, S. Bai, and X. Gu, “Vargan: Adversarial learning of
variable semantic representations,” IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering, 2024.
[202] I. Saberi and F. H. Fard, “Model-agnostic syntactical informa-
tion for pre-trained programming language models,” in 2023
IEEE/ACM 20th International Conference on Mining Software Repos-
itories (MSR). IEEE, 2023, pp. 183–193.
[203] L. Cui, J. Yin, J. Cui, Y. Ji, P . Liu, Z. Hao, and X. Yun, “Api2vec++:
Boosting api sequence representation for malware detection and
classification,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 2024.
[204] M. Agarwal, Y. Shen, B. Wang, Y. Kim, and J. Chen, “Structured
code representations enable data-efficient adaptation of code
language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.10716, 2024.
[205] J. He, X. Zhou, B. Xu, T. Zhang, K. Kim, Z. Yang, F. Thung, I. C.
Irsan, and D. Lo, “Representation learning for stack overflow
posts: How far are we?” ACM Transactions on Software Engineering
and Methodology, vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 1–24, 2024.
[206] J. Zhao, Y. Rong, Y. Guo, Y. He, and H. Chen, “Understand-
ing programs by exploiting (fuzzing) test cases,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.13592, 2023.
[207] D. Shen, X. Chen, C. Wang, K. Sen, and D. Song, “Benchmarking
language models for code syntax understanding,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2210.14473, 2022.
[208] A. Khakhar, S. Mell, and O. Bastani, “Pac prediction sets for large
language models of code,” in International Conference on Machine
Learning. PMLR, 2023, pp. 16 237–16 249.
[209] T. Baral, S. Rahman, B. N. Chanumolu, B. Balcı, T. Tuncer, A. Shi,
and W. Lam, “Optimizing continuous development by detecting
and preventing unnecessary content generation,” in 2023 38th
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engi-
neering (ASE). IEEE, 2023, pp. 901–913.
[210] J. Zhang, S. Liu, L. Gong, H. Zhang, Z. Huang, and H. Jiang, “Be-
qain: An effective and efficient identifier normalization approach
with bert and the question answering system,” IEEE Transactions
on Software Engineering, vol. 49, no. 4, pp. 2597–2620, 2022.
[211] A. S. Alsayed, H. K. Dam, and C. Nguyen, “Microrec: Leveraging
large language models for microservice recommendation,” in
2024 IEEE/ACM 21st International Conference on Mining Software
Repositories (MSR). IEEE, 2024, pp. 419–430.
[212] M. U. Nasir, S. Earle, J. Togelius, S. James, and C. Cleghorn,
“Llmatic: Neural architecture search via large language models
and quality diversity optimization,” in Proceedings of the Genetic
and Evolutionary Computation Conference, 2024, pp. 1110–1118.
[213] B. H. Banday, T. Z. Islam, and A. Marathe, “Perfgen: A synthesis
and evaluation framework for performance data using generative
ai,” in 2024 IEEE 48th Annual Computers, Software, and Applications
Conference (COMPSAC). IEEE, 2024, pp. 188–197.
[214] D. A. Le, A. M. Bui, P . T. Nguyen, and D. Di Ruscio, “Good
things come in three: Generating so post titles with pre-trained
models, self improvement and post ranking,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.15633, 2024.
[215] K. Jesse, P . T. Devanbu, and A. Sawant, “Learning to predict user-
defined types,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, vol. 49,
no. 4, pp. 1508–1522, 2022.
[216] C. Qian, W. Liu, H. Liu, N. Chen, Y. Dang, J. Li, C. Yang,
W. Chen, Y. Su, X. Cong et al., “Chatdev: Communicative agents
for software development,” in Proceedings of the 62nd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers), 2024, pp. 15 174–15 186.
[217] Z. Zhu, Y. Wang, and Y. Li, “Trobo: A novel deep transfer
model for enhancing cross-project bug localization,” inKnowledge
Science, Engineering and Management: 14th International Conference,
KSEM 2021, Tokyo, Japan, August 14–16, 2021, Proceedings, Part I .
Springer, 2021, pp. 529–541.
[218] A. Ciborowska and K. Damevski, “Fast changeset-based bug
localization with bert,” in Proceedings of the 44th International
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE’22), 2022, pp. 946–957.
[219] M. Chandramohan, D. Q. Nguyen, P . Krishnan, and J. Jancic,
“Supporting cross-language cross-project bug localization using
pre-trained language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.02732 ,
2024.
[220] Y. Wu, Z. Li, J. M. Zhang, M. Papadakis, M. Harman, and Y. Liu,
“Large language models in fault localisation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2308.15276, 2023.
[221] S. Kang, G. An, and S. Yoo, “A quantitative and qualitative eval-
uation of llm-based explainable fault localization,” Proceedings of
the ACM on Software Engineering , vol. 1, no. FSE, pp. 1424–1446,
2024.
[222] A. Z. Yang, C. Le Goues, R. Martins, and V . J. Hellendoorn,
“Large language models for test-free fault localization,” in 2024
IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on Software Engineering
(ICSE). IEEE, 2024, pp. 165–176.
[223] R. Widyasari, J. W. Ang, T. G. Nguyen, N. Sharma, and D. Lo,
“Demystifying faulty code: Step-by-step reasoning for explain-
able fault localization,” in 2024 IEEE International Conference on
Software Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering (SANER) . IEEE,
2024, pp. 568–579.
[224] X. Xu, Z. Zhang, S. Feng, Y. Ye, Z. Su, N. Jiang, S. Cheng, L. Tan,
and X. Zhang, “Lmpa: Improving decompilation by synergy
of large language model and program analysis,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2306.02546, 2023.
[225] W. K. Wong, H. Wang, Z. Li, Z. Liu, S. Wang, Q. Tang, S. Nie,
and S. Wu, “Refining decompiled c code with large language
models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06530, 2023.
[226] P . Hu, R. Liang, and K. Chen, “Degpt: Optimizing decompiler
output with llm,” in Proceedings 2024 Network and Distributed
System Security Symposium (2024). https://api. semanticscholar. org/-
CorpusID, vol. 267622140, 2024.
[227] H. Tan, Q. Luo, J. Li, and Y. Zhang, “Llm4decompile: Decom-
piling binary code with large language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.05286, 2024.
[228] N. Jiang, C. Wang, K. Liu, X. Xu, L. Tan, and X. Zhang,
“Nova+: Generative language models for binaries,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.13721, 2023.
[229] J. Armengol-Estap ´e, J. Woodruff, C. Cummins, and M. F. O’Boyle,
“Slade: A portable small language model decompiler for opti-
mized assembly,” in 2024 IEEE/ACM International Symposium on
Code Generation and Optimization (CGO). IEEE, 2024, pp. 67–80.
[230] X. She, Y. Zhao, and H. Wang, “Wadec: Decompile webassembly
using large language model,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.11346 ,
2024.
[231] X. Shang, S. Cheng, G. Chen, Y. Zhang, L. Hu, X. Yu, G. Li,
W. Zhang, and N. Yu, “How far have we gone in stripped binary
code understanding using large language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.09836, 2024.
[232] S. Chakraborty, R. Krishna, Y. Ding, and B. Ray, “Deep learning
based vulnerability detection: Are we there yet,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Software Engineering, 2021.
[233] Y. Li, S. Wang, and T. N. Nguyen, “Vulnerability detection with
fine-grained interpretations,” in Proceedings of the 29th ACM Joint
Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference and Sympo-
sium on the Foundations of Software Engineering , 2021, pp. 292–303.

--- PDF PAGE 36 ---
36
[234] X. Du, M. Wen, J. Zhu, Z. Xie, B. Ji, H. Liu, X. Shi, and H. Jin,
“Generalization-enhanced code vulnerability detection via multi-
task instruction fine-tuning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.03718 ,
2024.
[235] Y. Sun, D. Wu, Y. Xue, H. Liu, H. Wang, Z. Xu, X. Xie, and Y. Liu,
“Gptscan: Detecting logic vulnerabilities in smart contracts by
combining gpt with program analysis,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on Software Engineering ,
2024, pp. 1–13.
[236] B. Steenhoek, M. M. Rahman, R. Jiles, and W. Le, “An empirical
study of deep learning models for vulnerability detection,” in
2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference on Software Engineer-
ing (ICSE). IEEE, 2023, pp. 2237–2248.
[237] C. Zhang, H. Liu, J. Zeng, K. Yang, Y. Li, and H. Li, “Prompt-
enhanced software vulnerability detection using chatgpt,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2308.12697, 2023.
[238] D. Noever, “Can large language models find and fix vulnerable
software?” arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.10345, 2023.
[239] S. Alagarsamy, C. Tantithamthavorn, and A. Aleti, “A3test:
Assertion-augmented automated test case generation,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2302.10352, 2023.
[240] N. Rao, K. Jain, U. Alon, C. Le Goues, and V . J. Hellendoorn, “Cat-
lm training language models on aligned code and tests,” in 2023
38th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software
Engineering (ASE). IEEE, 2023, pp. 409–420.
[241] M. Schafer, S. Nadi, A. Eghbali, and F. Tip, “An empirical eval-
uation of using large language models for automated unit test
generation,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , vol. 50,
no. 1, pp. 85–105, 2024.
[242] A. M. Dakhel, A. Nikanjam, V . Majdinasab, F. Khomh, and
M. C. Desmarais, “Effective test generation using pre-trained
large language models and mutation testing,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2308.16557, 2023.
[243] G. Ryan, S. Jain, M. Shang, S. Wang, X. Ma, M. K. Ramanathan,
and B. Ray, “Code-aware prompting: A study of coverage guided
test generation in regression setting using llm,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.00097, 2024.
[244] J. A. Pizzorno and E. D. Berger, “Coverup: Coverage-guided llm-
based test generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.16218, 2024.
[245] S. Gu, C. Fang, Q. Zhang, F. Tian, and Z. Chen, “Testart: Improv-
ing llm-based unit test via co-evolution of automated generation
and repair iteration,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.03095, 2024.
[246] H. Karmarkar, S. Agrawal, A. Chauhan, and P . Shete, “Navigat-
ing confidentiality in test automation: A case study in llm driven
test data generation,” in 2024 IEEE International Conference on
Software Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering (SANER) . IEEE,
2024, pp. 337–348.
[247] Z. Xie, Y. Chen, C. Zhi, S. Deng, and J. Yin, “Chatunitest: a
chatgpt-based automated unit test generation tool,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.04764, 2023.
[248] C. Ni, X. Wang, L. Chen, D. Zhao, Z. Cai, S. Wang, and
X. Yang, “Casmodatest: A cascaded and model-agnostic self-
directed framework for unit test generation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.15743, 2024.
[249] C. Lemieux, J. P . Inala, S. K. Lahiri, and S. Sen, “Codamosa:
Escaping coverage plateaus in test generation with pre-trained
large language models,” in International conference on software
engineering (ICSE), 2023.
[250] D. Xiao, Y. Guo, Y. Li, and L. Chen, “Optimizing search-based
unit test generation with large language models: An empirical
study,” in Proceedings of the 15th Asia-Pacific Symposium on Inter-
netware, 2024, pp. 71–80.
[251] Y. Tang, Z. Liu, Z. Zhou, and X. Luo, “Chatgpt vs sbst: A compar-
ative assessment of unit test suite generation,” IEEE Transactions
on Software Engineering, 2024.
[252] L. Yang, C. Yang, S. Gao, W. Wang, B. Wang, Q. Zhu, X. Chu,
J. Zhou, G. Liang, Q. Wang et al. , “An empirical study of
unit test generation with large language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.18181, 2024.
[253] V . Guilherme and A. Vincenzi, “An initial investigation of chatgpt
unit test generation capability,” in Proceedings of the 8th Brazilian
Symposium on Systematic and Automated Software Testing, 2023, pp.
15–24.
[254] Z. Yuan, M. Liu, S. Ding, K. Wang, Y. Chen, X. Peng, and Y. Lou,
“Evaluating and improving chatgpt for unit test generation,”
Proceedings of the ACM on Software Engineering , vol. 1, no. FSE,
pp. 1703–1726, 2024.
[255] W. C. Ou ´edraogo, K. Kabor ´e, H. Tian, Y. Song, A. Koyuncu,
J. Klein, D. Lo, and T. F. Bissyand ´e, “Large-scale, independent
and comprehensive study of the power of llms for test case
generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.00225, 2024.
[256] A. Deljouyi, R. Koohestani, M. Izadi, and A. Zaidman, “Leverag-
ing large language models for enhancing the understandability
of generated unit tests,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.11710, 2024.
[257] C. Cui, T. Li, J. Wang, C. Chen, D. Towey, and R. Huang,
“Large language models for mobile gui text input generation:
An empirical study,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.08948, 2024.
[258] Y. Zhang, W. Song, Z. Ji, N. Meng et al. , “How well does llm
generate security tests?” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.00710, 2023.
[259] M. Tufano, D. Drain, A. Svyatkovskiy, and N. Sundaresan,
“Generating accurate assert statements for unit test cases using
pretrained transformers,” in Proceedings of the 3rd ACM/IEEE
International Conference on Automation of Software Test , 2022, pp.
54–64.
[260] E. Dinella, G. Ryan, T. Mytkowicz, and S. K. Lahiri, “Toga: A
neural method for test oracle generation,” in Proceedings of the
44th International Conference on Software Engineering , 2022, pp.
2130–2141.
[261] Y. He, J. Huang, H. Yu, and T. Xie, “An empirical study on
focal methods in deep-learning-based approaches for assertion
generation,” Proceedings of the ACM on Software Engineering, vol. 1,
no. FSE, pp. 1750–1771, 2024.
[262] V . Pulavarthi, D. Nandal, S. Dan, and D. Pal, “Assertionbench:
A benchmark to evaluate large-language models for assertion
generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.18627, 2024.
[263] M. Endres, S. Fakhoury, S. Chakraborty, and S. K. Lahiri, “Can
large language models transform natural language intent into
formal method postconditions?” Proceedings of the ACM on Soft-
ware Engineering, vol. 1, no. FSE, pp. 1889–1912, 2024.
[264] S. B. Hossain and M. Dwyer, “Togll: Correct and strong test oracle
generation with llms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.03786, 2024.
[265] R. Pan, T. A. Ghaleb, and L. Briand, “Ltm: Scalable and black-
box similarity-based test suite minimization based on language
models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.01397, 2023.
[266] Y. Deng, C. S. Xia, H. Peng, C. Yang, and L. Zhang, “Large
language models are zero-shot fuzzers: Fuzzing deep-learning
libraries via large language models,” in Proceedings of the 32nd
ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and
Analysis (ISSTA 2023), 2023.
[267] Y. Deng, C. S. Xia, C. Yang, S. D. Zhang, S. Yang, and L. Zhang,
“Large language models are edge-case fuzzers: Testing deep
learning libraries via fuzzgpt,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.02014 ,
2023.
[268] C. Yang, Y. Deng, R. Lu, J. Yao, J. Liu, R. Jabbarvand, and
L. Zhang, “White-box compiler fuzzing empowered by large
language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.15991, 2023.
[269] J. Eom, S. Jeong, and T. Kwon, “Covrl: Fuzzing javascript engines
with coverage-guided reinforcement learning for llm-based mu-
tation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.12222, 2024.
[270] R. Meng, M. Mirchev, M. B ¨ohme, and A. Roychoudhury, “Large
language model guided protocol fuzzing.” NDSS, 2024.
[271] J. Wang, L. Yu, and X. Luo, “Llmif: Augmented large language
model for fuzzing iot devices,” in 2024 IEEE Symposium on
Security and Privacy (SP). IEEE Computer Society, 2024, pp. 196–
196.
[272] C. S. Xia, M. Paltenghi, J. Le Tian, M. Pradel, and L. Zhang,
“Fuzz4all: Universal fuzzing with large language models,” in
2024 IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on Software Engineer-
ing (ICSE). IEEE, 2024, pp. 1547–1559.
[273] J. Hu, Q. Zhang, and H. Yin, “Augmenting greybox fuzzing with
generative ai,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.06782, 2023.
[274] A. Dakhama, K. Even-Mendoza, W. B. Langdon, H. D. Menendez,
and J. Petke, “Searchgem5: Towards reliable gem5 with search
based software testing and large language models,” in 15th
Symposium on Search Based Software Engineering (SSBSE): Lecture
Notes in Computer Science. Springer, 2023.
[275] H. Zhang, Y. Rong, Y. He, and H. Chen, “Llamafuzz: Large
language model enhanced greybox fuzzing,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.07714, 2024.
[276] C. Zhang, M. Bai, Y. Zheng, Y. Li, X. Xie, Y. Li, W. Ma, L. Sun, and
Y. Liu, “Understanding large language model based fuzz driver
generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.12469, 2023.

--- PDF PAGE 37 ---
37
[277] C. Shou, J. Liu, D. Lu, and K. Sen, “Llm4fuzz: Guided fuzzing
of smart contracts with large language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2401.11108, 2024.
[278] C. Yang, Z. Zhao, and L. Zhang, “Kernelgpt: Enhanced
kernel fuzzing via large language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2401.00563, 2023.
[279] Asmita, Y. Oliinyk, M. Scott, R. Tsang, C. Fang,
and H. Homayoun, “Fuzzing BusyBox: Leveraging LLM
and crash reuse for embedded bug unearthing,” in
33rd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 24) .
Philadelphia, PA: USENIX Association, Aug. 2024, pp. 883–
900. [Online]. Available: https://www.usenix.org/conference/
usenixsecurity24/presentation/asmita
[280] G. Deng, Y. Liu, V . Mayoral-Vilches, P . Liu, Y. Li, Y. Xu,
T. Zhang, Y. Liu, M. Pinzger, and S. Rass, “Pentestgpt: An llm-
empowered automatic penetration testing tool,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2308.06782, 2023.
[281] L. Wu, X. Zhong, J. Liu, and X. Wang, “Ptgroup: An auto-
mated penetration testing framework using llms and multiple
prompt chains,” in International Conference on Intelligent Comput-
ing. Springer, 2024, pp. 220–232.
[282] A. Happe and J. Cito, “Getting pwn’d by ai: Penetration testing
with large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.00121 ,
2023.
[283] V . Vikram, C. Lemieux, and R. Padhye, “Can large lan-
guage models write good property-based tests?” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.04346, 2023.
[284] T.-O. Li, W. Zong, Y. Wang, H. Tian, Y. Wang, and S.-C. Cheung,
“Finding failure-inducing test cases with chatgpt,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.11686, 2023.
[285] A. Khanfir, R. Degiovanni, M. Papadakis, and Y. L. Traon, “Ef-
ficient mutation testing via pre-trained language models,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2301.03543, 2023.
[286] A. R. Ibrahimzada, Y. Chen, R. Rong, and R. Jabbarvand, “Auto-
mated bug generation in the era of large language models,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2310.02407, 2023.
[287] Y. Nong, Y. Ou, M. Pradel, F. Chen, and H. Cai, “Vulgen:
Realistic vulnerability generation via pattern mining and deep
learning,” in IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference on Soft-
ware Engineering(ICSE) https://www. software-lab. org/publication-
s/icse2023 VulGen. pdf, 2023.
[288] A. Garg, R. Degiovanni, M. Papadakis, and Y. Le Traon, “On
the coupling between vulnerabilities and llm-generated mutants:
A study on vul4j dataset,” in 2024 IEEE Conference on Software
Testing, Verification and Validation (ICST) . IEEE, 2024, pp. 305–
316.
[289] B. Wang, M. Chen, Y. Lin, M. Papadakis, and J. M. Zhang, “An
exploratory study on using large language models for mutation
testing,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09843, 2024.
[290] Z. Tian, H. Shu, D. Wang, X. Cao, Y. Kamei, and J. Chen, “Large
language models for equivalent mutant detection: How far are
we?” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.01760, 2024.
[291] Z. Liu, C. Chen, J. Wang, X. Che, Y. Huang, J. Hu, and Q. Wang,
“Fill in the blank: Context-aware automated text input generation
for mobile gui testing,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.04732, 2022.
[292] Z. Liu, C. Chen, J. Wang, M. Chen, B. Wu, X. Che, D. Wang,
and Q. Wang, “Make llm a testing expert: Bringing human-
like interaction to mobile gui testing via functionality-aware
decisions,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.15780, 2023.
[293] Z. Liu, C. Li, C. Chen, J. Wang, B. Wu, Y. Wang, J. Hu, and
Q. Wang, “Vision-driven automated mobile gui testing via mul-
timodal large language model,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.03037 ,
2024.
[294] J. Yoon, R. Feldt, and S. Yoo, “Intent-driven mobile gui testing
with autonomous large language model agents,” in 2024 IEEE
Conference on Software Testing, Verification and Validation (ICST) .
IEEE, 2024, pp. 129–139.
[295] P . He, C. Meister, and Z. Su, “Structure-invariant testing for
machine translation,” in Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE 42nd Inter-
national Conference on Software Engineering, 2020, pp. 961–973.
[296] S. Gupta, P . He, C. Meister, and Z. Su, “Machine translation
testing via pathological invariance,” in Proceedings of the 28th
ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference
and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering , 2020,
pp. 863–875.
[297] Z. Sun, J. M. Zhang, Y. Xiong, M. Harman, M. Papadakis, and
L. Zhang, “Improving machine translation systems via isotopic
replacement,” in Proceedings of the 44th International Conference on
Software Engineering, 2022, pp. 1181–1192.
[298] B. Yu, Y. Hu, Q. Mang, W. Hu, and P . He, “Automated testing and
improvement of named entity recognition systems,” in Proceed-
ings of the 31st ACM Joint European Software Engineering Conference
and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering , ser. ES-
EC/FSE 2023. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing
Machinery, 2023, pp. 883–894.
[299] W. Wang, J.-t. Huang, W. Wu, J. Zhang, Y. Huang, S. Li, P . He, and
M. R. Lyu, “Mttm: Metamorphic testing for textual content mod-
eration software,” in 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference
on Software Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 2023, pp. 2387–2399.
[300] Z. Liu, Y. Feng, and Z. Chen, “Dialtest: automated testing for
recurrent-neural-network-driven dialogue systems,” in Proceed-
ings of the 30th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software
Testing and Analysis, 2021, pp. 115–126.
[301] Z. Liu, Y. Feng, Y. Yin, J. Sun, Z. Chen, and B. Xu, “Qatest: A
uniform fuzzing framework for question answering systems,”
in Proceedings of the 37th IEEE/ACM International Conference on
Automated Software Engineering, 2022, pp. 1–12.
[302] T. Le, T. Tran, D. Cao, V . Le, T. N. Nguyen, and V . Nguyen, “Kat:
Dependency-aware automated api testing with large language
models,” in 2024 IEEE Conference on Software Testing, Verification
and Validation (ICST). IEEE, 2024, pp. 82–92.
[303] Z. Xue, Z. Gao, S. Wang, X. Hu, X. Xia, and S. Li, “Selfpico:
Self-guided partial code execution with llms,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.16974, 2024.
[304] H. Li, Y. Hao, Y. Zhai, and Z. Qian, “Assisting static analysis with
large language models: A chatgpt experiment,” in Proceedings of
the 31st ACM Joint European Software Engineering Conference and
Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering , 2023, pp.
2107–2111.
[305] Y. Hao, W. Chen, Z. Zhou, and W. Cui, “E&v: Prompting large
language models to perform static analysis by pseudo-code exe-
cution and verification,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.08477, 2023.
[306] M. M. Mohajer, R. Aleithan, N. S. Harzevili, M. Wei, A. B. Belle,
H. V . Pham, and S. Wang, “Skipanalyzer: An embodied agent
for code analysis with large language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.18532, 2023.
[307] Y. Li, Y. Peng, Y. Huo, and M. R. Lyu, “Enhancing llm-based
coding tools through native integration of ide-derived static
context,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03630, 2024.
[308] J. Sun, Z. Xing, Q. Lu, X. Xu, L. Zhu, T. Hoang, and D. Zhao,
“Silent vulnerable dependency alert prediction with vulnerability
key aspect explanation,” in 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) . IEEE, 2023, pp. 970–
982.
[309] K. Liu, Y. Liu, Z. Chen, J. M. Zhang, Y. Han, Y. Ma, G. Li, and
G. Huang, “Llm-powered test case generation for detecting tricky
bugs,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.10304, 2024.
[310] H. Zhang, S. Lu, Z. Li, Z. Jin, L. Ma, Y. Liu, and G. Li, “Codebert-
attack: Adversarial attack against source code deep learning
models via pre-trained model,” Journal of Software: Evolution and
Process, vol. 36, no. 3, p. e2571, 2024.
[311] M. Zhang, Y. Tian, Z. Xu, Y. Dong, S. H. Tan, and C. Sun,
“Lpr: Large language models-aided program reduction,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 33rd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on
Software Testing and Analysis (Vienna, Austria)(ISSTA 2024). As-
sociation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA. https://doi.
org/10.1145/3650212.3652126, 2024.
[312] F. Li, J. Jiang, J. Sun, and H. Zhang, “Hybrid automated program
repair by combining large language models and program analy-
sis,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.00992, 2024.
[313] J. Xu, Y. Fu, S. H. Tan, and P . He, “Aligning llms for fl-free
program repair,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.08877, 2024.
[314] S. B. Hossain, N. Jiang, Q. Zhou, X. Li, W.-H. Chiang, Y. Lyu,
H. Nguyen, and O. Tripp, “A deep dive into large language
models for automated bug localization and repair,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.11595, 2024.
[315] N. Jiang, T. Lutellier, and L. Tan, “Cure: Code-aware neural
machine translation for automatic program repair,” in 2021
IEEE/ACM 43rd International Conference on Software Engineering
(ICSE). IEEE, 2021, pp. 1161–1173.
[316] Y. Li, S. Wang, and T. N. Nguyen, “Dear: A novel deep learning-
based approach for automated program repair,” in Proceedings of
the 44th International Conference on Software Engineering , 2022, pp.
511–523.

--- PDF PAGE 38 ---
38
[317] B. Yang, H. Tian, J. Ren, H. Zhang, J. Klein, T. F. Bissyand ´e,
C. L. Goues, and S. Jin, “Multi-objective fine-tuning for enhanced
program repair with llms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.12636, 2024.
[318] D. Drain, C. Wu, A. Svyatkovskiy, and N. Sundaresan, “Gen-
erating bug-fixes using pretrained transformers,” in Proceedings
of the 5th ACM SIGPLAN International Symposium on Machine
Programming, 2021, pp. 1–8.
[319] B. Berabi, J. He, V . Raychev, and M. Vechev, “Tfix: Learning to
fix coding errors with a text-to-text transformer,” in International
Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2021, pp. 780–791.
[320] M. Dehghan, J. J. Wu, F. H. Fard, and A. Ouni, “Mergerepair: An
exploratory study on merging task-specific adapters in code llms
for automated program repair,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.09568 ,
2024.
[321] A. Silva, S. Fang, and M. Monperrus, “Repairllama: Efficient
representations and fine-tuned adapters for program repair,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.15698, 2023.
[322] Y. Wei, C. S. Xia, and L. Zhang, “Copiloting the copilots: Fusing
large language models with completion engines for automated
program repair,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.00608, 2023.
[323] F. V . Ruiz, A. Grishina, M. Hort, and L. Moonen, “A novel ap-
proach for automatic program repair using round-trip translation
with large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.07994 ,
2024.
[324] Y. Peng, S. Gao, C. Gao, Y. Huo, and M. R. Lyu, “Domain
knowledge matters: Improving prompts with fix templates for
repairing python type errors,” in 2024 IEEE/ACM 46th Interna-
tional Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) . IEEE, 2024, pp.
12–24.
[325] J. Xiang, X. Xu, F. Kong, M. Wu, H. Zhang, and Y. Zhang, “How
far can we go with practical function-level program repair?”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.12833, 2024.
[326] K. Huang, X. Meng, J. Zhang, Y. Liu, W. Wang, S. Li, and
Y. Zhang, “An empirical study on fine-tuning large language
models of code for automated program repair,” in 2023 38th
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engi-
neering (ASE). IEEE, 2023, pp. 1162–1174.
[327] N. Jiang, K. Liu, T. Lutellier, and L. Tan, “Impact of code
language models on automated program repair,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2302.05020, 2023.
[328] Z. Fan, X. Gao, A. Roychoudhury, and S. H. Tan, “Automated
repair of programs from large language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2205.10583, 2022.
[329] D. Sobania, M. Briesch, C. Hanna, and J. Petke, “An analysis of
the automatic bug fixing performance of chatgpt,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2301.08653, 2023.
[330] J. Cao, M. Li, M. Wen, and S.-c. Cheung, “A study on prompt
design, advantages and limitations of chatgpt for deep learning
program repair,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.08191, 2023.
[331] M. Jin, S. Shahriar, M. Tufano, X. Shi, S. Lu, N. Sundaresan,
and A. Svyatkovskiy, “Inferfix: End-to-end program repair with
llms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.07263, 2023.
[332] J. Zhao, D. Yang, L. Zhang, X. Lian, and Z. Yang, “Enhancing llm-
based automated program repair with design rationales,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2408.12056, 2024.
[333] N. Wadhwa, J. Pradhan, A. Sonwane, S. P . Sahu, N. Natarajan,
A. Kanade, S. Parthasarathy, and S. Rajamani, “Core: Resolving
code quality issues using llms,”Proceedings of the ACM on Software
Engineering, vol. 1, no. FSE, pp. 789–811, 2024.
[334] H. Joshi, J. C. Sanchez, S. Gulwani, V . Le, G. Verbruggen, and
I. Radi ˇcek, “Repair is nearly generation: Multilingual program
repair with llms,” inProceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, vol. 37, no. 4, 2023, pp. 5131–5140.
[335] B. Yang, H. Tian, W. Pian, H. Yu, H. Wang, J. Klein, T. F.
Bissyand´e, and S. Jin, “Cref: An llm-based conversational soft-
ware repair framework for programming tutors,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.13972, 2024.
[336] Y. Charalambous, E. Manino, and L. C. Cordeiro, “Automated
repair of ai code with large language models and formal verifica-
tion,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.08848, 2024.
[337] Q. Xin, H. Wu, S. P . Reiss, and J. Xuan, “Towards practical and
useful automated program repair for debugging,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.08958, 2024.
[338] A. Z. Yang, S. Kolak, V . J. Hellendoorn, R. Martins, and
C. L. Goues, “Revisiting unnaturalness for automated program
repair in the era of large language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.15236, 2024.
[339] J. Zhang, J. P . Cambronero, S. Gulwani, V . Le, R. Piskac, G. Soares,
and G. Verbruggen, “Pydex: Repairing bugs in introductory
python assignments using llms,” Proceedings of the ACM on Pro-
gramming Languages, vol. 8, no. OOPSLA1, pp. 1100–1124, 2024.
[340] I. Bouzenia, P . Devanbu, and M. Pradel, “Repairagent: An au-
tonomous, llm-based agent for program repair,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.17134, 2024.
[341] C. Lee, C. S. Xia, J.-t. Huang, Z. Zhu, L. Zhang, and M. R. Lyu, “A
unified debugging approach via llm-based multi-agent synergy,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.17153, 2024.
[342] X. Yin, C. Ni, S. Wang, Z. Li, L. Zeng, and X. Yang, “Thinkre-
pair: Self-directed automated program repair,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.20898, 2024.
[343] C. S. Xia and L. Zhang, “Keep the conversation going: Fixing
162 out of 337 bugs for $0.42 each using chatgpt,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.00385, 2023.
[344] Q. Xin, H. Wu, J. Tang, X. Liu, S. P . Reiss, and J. Xuan, “Detecting,
creating, repairing, and understanding indivisible multi-hunk
bugs,” Proceedings of the ACM on Software Engineering , vol. 1, no.
FSE, pp. 2747–2770, 2024.
[345] Y. Wang, T. Guo, Z. Huang, and Y. Yuan, “Revisiting evolution-
ary program repair via code language model,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2408.10486, 2024.
[346] D. Hidv ´egi, K. Etemadi, S. Bobadilla, and M. Monperrus,
“Cigar: Cost-efficient program repair with llms,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.06598, 2024.
[347] E. First, M. N. Rabe, T. Ringer, and Y. Brun, “Baldur: Whole-proof
generation and repair with large language models,” in Proceed-
ings of the 31st ACM Joint European Software Engineering Conference
and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering , 2023,
pp. 1229–1241.
[348] M. Fu, C. Tantithamthavorn, T. Le, V . Nguyen, and D. Phung,
“Vulrepair: a t5-based automated software vulnerability repair,”
in Proceedings of the 30th ACM Joint European Software Engineering
Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineer-
ing, 2022, pp. 935–947.
[349] M. Fu, V . Nguyen, C. Tantithamthavorn, D. Phung, and T. Le,
“Vision transformer inspired automated vulnerability repair,”
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, vol. 33,
no. 3, pp. 1–29, 2024.
[350] X. Zhou, K. Kim, B. Xu, D. Han, and D. Lo, “Out of sight, out
of mind: Better automatic vulnerability repair by broadening
input ranges and sources,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 46th
International Conference on Software Engineering, 2024, pp. 1–13.
[351] H. Pearce, B. Tan, B. Ahmad, R. Karri, and B. Dolan-Gavitt,
“Examining zero-shot vulnerability repair with large language
models,” in 2023 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) .
IEEE, 2023, pp. 2339–2356.
[352] M. C. Tol and B. Sunar, “Zeroleak: Using llms for scalable and cost
effective side-channel patching,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.13062,
2023.
[353] H. Tian, K. Liu, A. K. Kabor ´e, A. Koyuncu, L. Li, J. Klein, and T. F.
Bissyand´e, “Evaluating representation learning of code changes
for predicting patch correctness in program repair,” in Proceed-
ings of the 35th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated
Software Engineering, 2020, pp. 981–992.
[354] H. Tian, K. Liu, Y. Li, A. K. Kabor ´e, A. Koyuncu, A. Habib, L. Li,
J. Wen, J. Klein, and T. F. Bissyand ´e, “The best of both worlds:
Combining learned embeddings with engineered features for
accurate prediction of correct patches,” ACM Transactions on
Software Engineering and Methodology, vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 1–34, 2023.
[355] H. Tian, X. Tang, A. Habib, S. Wang, K. Liu, X. Xia, J. Klein,
and T. F. Bissyand´e, “Is this change the answer to that problem?
correlating descriptions of bug and code changes for evaluating
patch correctness,” in Proceedings of the 37th IEEE/ACM Interna-
tional Conference on Automated Software Engineering , 2022, pp. 1–
13.
[356] T. Le-Cong, D.-M. Luong, X. B. D. Le, D. Lo, N.-H. Tran,
B. Quang-Huy, and Q.-T. Huynh, “Invalidator: Automated patch
correctness assessment via semantic and syntactic reasoning,”
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, vol. 49, no. 6, pp. 3411–
3429, 2023.
[357] Q. Zhang, C. Fang, W. Sun, Y. Liu, T. He, X. Hao, and Z. Chen,
“Appt: Boosting automated patch correctness prediction via fine-
tuning pre-trained models,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engi-
neering, vol. 50, no. 03, pp. 474–494, 2024.

--- PDF PAGE 39 ---
39
[358] X. Zhou, B. Xu, K. Kim, D. Han, T. Le-Cong, J. He, B. Le,
and D. Lo, “Patchzero: Zero-shot automatic patch correctness
assessment,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.00202, 2023.
[359] F. Molina, J. M. Copia, and A. Gorla, “Improving patch correct-
ness analysis via random testing and large language models,” in
2024 IEEE Conference on Software Testing, Verification and Validation
(ICST). IEEE, 2024, pp. 317–328.
[360] T. H. Jung, “Commitbert: Commit message generation using
pre-trained programming language model,” in Proceedings of
the 1st Workshop on Natural Language Processing for Programming
(NLP4Prog 2021), 2021, pp. 26–33.
[361] L. Wang, X. Tang, Y. He, C. Ren, S. Shi, C. Yan, and Z. Li, “Delving
into commit-issue correlation to enhance commit message gener-
ation models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.00147, 2023.
[362] J. Li, D. Farag ´o, C. Petrov, and I. Ahmed, “Only diff is not enough:
Generating commit messages leveraging reasoning and action
of large language model,” Proceedings of the ACM on Software
Engineering, vol. 1, no. FSE, pp. 745–766, 2024.
[363] P . Xue, L. Wu, Z. Yu, Z. Jin, Z. Yang, X. Li, Z. Yang, and
Y. Tan, “Automated commit message generation with large lan-
guage models: An empirical study and beyond,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.14824, 2024.
[364] C. V . Lopes, V . I. Klotzman, I. Ma, and I. Ahmed, “Commit
messages in the age of large language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2401.17622, 2024.
[365] R. Tufano, S. Masiero, A. Mastropaolo, L. Pascarella, D. Poshy-
vanyk, and G. Bavota, “Using pre-trained models to boost code
review automation,” in Proceedings of the 44th International Confer-
ence on Software Engineering, 2022, pp. 2291–2302.
[366] L. Li, L. Yang, H. Jiang, J. Yan, T. Luo, Z. Hua, G. Liang,
and C. Zuo, “Auger: automatically generating review comments
with pre-training models,” in Proceedings of the 30th ACM Joint
European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the
Foundations of Software Engineering, 2022, pp. 1009–1021.
[367] Z. Li, S. Lu, D. Guo, N. Duan, S. Jannu, G. Jenks, D. Majumder,
J. Green, A. Svyatkovskiy, S. Fu et al., “Automating code review
activities by large-scale pre-training,” in Proceedings of the 30th
ACM Joint European Software Engineering Conference and Sympo-
sium on the Foundations of Software Engineering , 2022, pp. 1035–
1047.
[368] R. Widyasari, T. Zhang, A. Bouraffa, and D. Lo, “Explaining
explanation: An empirical study on explanation in code reviews,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.09020, 2023.
[369] R. Tufano, O. Dabi ´c, A. Mastropaolo, M. Ciniselli, and G. Bavota,
“Code review automation: strengths and weaknesses of the state
of the art,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 2024.
[370] Q. Guo, J. Cao, X. Xie, S. Liu, X. Li, B. Chen, and X. Peng, “Ex-
ploring the potential of chatgpt in automated code refinement:
An empirical study,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.08221, 2023.
[371] T. Zhang, I. C. Irsan, F. Thung, and D. Lo, “Cupid: Leveraging
chatgpt for more accurate duplicate bug report detection,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2308.10022, 2023.
[372] L. Plein and T. F. Bissyand ´e, “Can llms demystify bug reports?”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06310, 2023.
[373] S. Kang, J. Yoon, and S. Yoo, “Large language models are few-shot
testers: Exploring llm-based general bug reproduction,” in 2023
IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference on Software Engineering
(ICSE). IEEE, 2023, pp. 2312–2323.
[374] Y. Huang, J. Wang, Z. Liu, Y. Wang, S. Wang, C. Chen, Y. Hu, and
Q. Wang, “Crashtranslator: Automatically reproducing mobile
application crashes directly from stack trace,” in Proceedings of the
46th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering ,
2024, pp. 1–13.
[375] S. Feng and C. Chen, “Prompting is all your need: Automated
android bug replay with large language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2306.01987, 2023.
[376] X. Hu, Z. Liu, X. Xia, Z. Liu, T. Xu, and X. Yang, “Identify and
update test cases when production code changes: A transformer-
based approach,” in 2023 38th IEEE/ACM International Conference
on Automated Software Engineering (ASE), 2023, pp. 1111–1122.
[377] J. Liu, J. Yan, Y. Xie, J. Yan, and J. Zhang, “Augmenting llms
to repair obsolete test cases with static collector and neural
reranker,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.03625, 2024.
[378] A. S. Yaraghi, D. Holden, N. Kahani, and L. Briand, “Auto-
mated test case repair using language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2401.06765, 2024.
[379] S. Tao, W. Meng, Y. Cheng, Y. Zhu, Y. Liu, C. Du, T. Han, Y. Zhao,
X. Wang, and H. Yang, “Logstamp: Automatic online log parsing
based on sequence labelling,” ACM SIGMETRICS Performance
Evaluation Review, vol. 49, no. 4, pp. 93–98, 2022.
[380] M. Mehrabi, A. Hamou-Lhadj, and H. Moosavi, “The effective-
ness of compact fine-tuned llms in log parsing.”
[381] V .-H. Le and H. Zhang, “Log parsing with prompt-based few-
shot learning,” in 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference on
Software Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 2023, pp. 2438–2449.
[382] Z. Ma, A. R. Chen, D. J. Kim, T.-H. Chen, and S. Wang, “Llm-
parser: An exploratory study on using large language models for
log parsing,” in 2024 IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on
Software Engineering (ICSE) . IEEE Computer Society, 2024, pp.
1209–1221.
[383] Z. Jiang, J. Liu, Z. Chen, Y. Li, J. Huang, Y. Huo, P . He, J. Gu, and
M. R. Lyu, “Lilac: Log parsing using llms with adaptive parsing
cache,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.01796, 2023.
[384] Y. Liu, S. Tao, W. Meng, J. Wang, W. Ma, Y. Chen, Y. Zhao,
H. Yang, and Y. Jiang, “Interpretable online log analysis using
large language models with prompt strategies,” in Proceedings of
the 32nd IEEE/ACM International Conference on Program Compre-
hension, 2024, pp. 35–46.
[385] J. Xu, Z. Cui, Y. Zhao, X. Zhang, S. He, P . He, L. Li, Y. Kang,
Q. Lin, Y. Dang et al. , “Unilog: Automatic logging via llm and
in-context learning,” in Proceedings of the 46th IEEE/ACM Interna-
tional Conference on Software Engineering, 2024, pp. 1–12.
[386] Y. Liu, S. Tao, W. Meng, F. Yao, X. Zhao, and H. Yang, “Log-
prompt: Prompt engineering towards zero-shot and interpretable
log analysis,” in Proceedings of the 2024 IEEE/ACM 46th Interna-
tional Conference on Software Engineering: Companion Proceedings ,
2024, pp. 364–365.
[387] Y. Xiao, V .-H. Le, and H. Zhang, “Stronger, faster, and cheaper
log parsing with llms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.06156, 2024.
[388] J. Huang, Z. Jiang, Z. Chen, and M. R. Lyu, “Ulog: Unsupervised
log parsing with large language models through log contrastive
units,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.07174, 2024.
[389] X. Ma, H. Zou, J. Keung, P . He, Y. Li, X. Yu, and F. Sarro,
“On the influence of data resampling for deep learning-based
log anomaly detection: Insights and recommendations,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2405.03489, 2024.
[390] V .-H. Le and H. Zhang, “Log parsing: How far can chatgpt
go?” in 2023 38th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated
Software Engineering (ASE) . IEEE Computer Society, 2023, pp.
1699–1704.
[391] F. Hadadi, Q. Xu, D. Bianculli, and L. Briand, “Anomaly
detection on unstable logs with gpt models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.07467, 2024.
[392] S. Huang, Y. Liu, J. Qi, J. Shang, Z. Xiao, C. Fung, Z. Wu, H. Yang,
Z. Luan, and D. Qian, “Gloss: Guiding large language models
to answer questions from system logs,” in 2024 IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering
(SANER). IEEE, 2024, pp. 91–101.
[393] P . Mudgal and R. Wouhaybi, “An assessment of chatgpt on
log data,” in International Conference on AI-generated Content .
Springer, 2023, pp. 148–169.
[394] Z. Zhang and T. Saber, “Assessing the code clone detection
capability of large language models,” in 2024 4th International
Conference on Code Quality (ICCQ). IEEE, 2024, pp. 75–83.
[395] M. B. Moumoula, A. K. Kabore, J. Klein, and T. Bissyande, “Large
language models for cross-language code clone detection,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2408.04430, 2024.
[396] S. Dou, J. Shan, H. Jia, W. Deng, Z. Xi, W. He, Y. Wu, T. Gui,
Y. Liu, and X. Huang, “Towards understanding the capability of
large language models on code clone detection: a survey,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2308.01191, 2023.
[397] A. K. Dipongkor and K. Moran, “A comparative study of
transformer-based neural text representation techniques on bug
triaging,” in 2023 38th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Au-
tomated Software Engineering (ASE). IEEE, 2023, pp. 1012–1023.
[398] J. Lee, K. Han, and H. Yu, “A light bug triage framework for
applying large pre-trained language model,” in Proceedings of
the 37th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software
Engineering, 2022, pp. 1–11.
[399] W. Ma, Y. Yu, X. Ruan, and B. Cai, “Pre-trained model based
feature envy detection,” in 2023 IEEE/ACM 20th International
Conference on Mining Software Repositories (MSR) . IEEE, 2023,
pp. 430–440.

--- PDF PAGE 40 ---
40
[400] M. M. Imran, P . Chatterjee, and K. Damevski, “Uncovering the
causes of emotions in software developer communication using
zero-shot llms,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 46th International
Conference on Software Engineering, 2024, pp. 1–13.
[401] Y. Cai, A. Yadavally, A. Mishra, G. Montejo, and T. Nguyen,
“Programming assistant for exception handling with codebert,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on
Software Engineering, 2024, pp. 1–13.
[402] Y. Jiang, C. Zhang, S. He, Z. Yang, M. Ma, S. Qin, Y. Kang,
Y. Dang, S. Rajmohan, Q. Lin et al., “Xpert: Empowering incident
management with query recommendations via large language
models,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 46th International Confer-
ence on Software Engineering, 2024, pp. 1–13.
[403] T. Ahmed, S. Ghosh, C. Bansal, T. Zimmermann, X. Zhang,
and S. Rajmohan, “Recommending root-cause and mitigation
steps for cloud incidents using large language models,” in 2023
IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference on Software Engineering
(ICSE). IEEE, 2023, pp. 1737–1749.
[404] G. Colavito, F. Lanubile, N. Novielli, and L. Quaranta, “Leverag-
ing gpt-like llms to automate issue labeling,” in 2024 IEEE/ACM
21st International Conference on Mining Software Repositories (MSR).
IEEE, 2024, pp. 469–480.
[405] G. Morales, K. Pragyan, S. Jahan, M. B. Hosseini, and R. Slavin,
“A large language model approach to code and privacy policy
alignment,” in 2024 IEEE International Conference on Software
Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering (SANER) . IEEE, 2024, pp.
79–90.
[406] N. Mohammed, A. Lal, A. Rastogi, S. Roy, and R. Sharma, “En-
abling memory safety of c programs using llms,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.01096, 2024.
[407] Z. Gao, H. Wang, Y. Wang, and C. Zhang, “Vic: Virtual com-
piler is all you need for assembly code search,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2408.06385, 2024.
[408] H. Tu, Z. Zhou, H. Jiang, I. N. B. Yusuf, Y. Li, and L. Jiang, “Isolat-
ing compiler bugs by generating effective witness programs with
large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.00593, 2023.
[409] S. J. Oishwee, N. Stakhanova, and Z. Codabux, “Large language
model vs. stack overflow in addressing android permission re-
lated challenges,” in 2024 IEEE/ACM 21st International Conference
on Mining Software Repositories (MSR). IEEE, 2024, pp. 373–383.
[410] M. Alhamed and T. Storer, “Evaluation of context-aware lan-
guage models and experts for effort estimation of software main-
tenance issues,” in 2022 IEEE International Conference on Software
Maintenance and Evolution (ICSME). IEEE, 2022, pp. 129–138.
[411] Y. Li, Z. Ren, Z. Wang, L. Yang, L. Dong, C. Zhong, and H. Zhang,
“Fine-se: Integrating semantic features and expert features for
software effort estimation,” in Proceedings of the 46th IEEE/ACM
International Conference on Software Engineering, 2024, pp. 1–12.
[412] J. Kannan, “Can llms configure software tools,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.06121, 2023.
[413] M. M. Imran, “Emotion classification in software engineering
texts: A comparative analysis of pre-trained transformers lan-
guage models,” in Proceedings of the Third ACM/IEEE International
Workshop on NL-based Software Engineering, 2024, pp. 73–80.
[414] S. Abedu, A. Abdellatif, and E. Shihab, “Llm-based chatbots for
mining software repositories: Challenges and opportunities,” in
Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Evaluation and
Assessment in Software Engineering, 2024, pp. 201–210.
[415] A. Mastropaolo, N. Cooper, D. N. Palacio, S. Scalabrino,
D. Poshyvanyk, R. Oliveto, and G. Bavota, “Using transfer
learning for code-related tasks,” IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering, vol. 49, no. 4, pp. 1580–1598, 2022.
[416] Z. Zeng, H. Tan, H. Zhang, J. Li, Y. Zhang, and L. Zhang, “An
extensive study on pre-trained models for program understand-
ing and generation,” in Proceedings of the 31st ACM SIGSOFT
international symposium on software testing and analysis , 2022, pp.
39–51.
[417] C. Niu, C. Li, V . Ng, D. Chen, J. Ge, and B. Luo, “An empirical
comparison of pre-trained models of source code,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2302.04026, 2023.
[418] S. Gao, X.-C. Wen, C. Gao, W. Wang, H. Zhang, and M. R.
Lyu, “What makes good in-context demonstrations for code
intelligence tasks with llms?” in2023 38th IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE) . IEEE, 2023,
pp. 761–773.
[419] J. White, S. Hays, Q. Fu, J. Spencer-Smith, and D. C. Schmidt,
“Chatgpt prompt patterns for improving code quality, refactor-
ing, requirements elicitation, and software design,” in Generative
AI for Effective Software Development. Springer, 2024, pp. 71–108.
[420] X. Zhou, K. Kim, B. Xu, J. Liu, D. Han, and D. Lo, “The devil
is in the tails: How long-tailed code distributions impact large
language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.03567, 2023.
[421] W. Liang and G. Xiao, “An exploratory evaluation of large
language models using empirical software engineering tasks,”
in Proceedings of the 15th Asia-Pacific Symposium on Internetware ,
2024, pp. 31–40.
[422] S. Jalil, S. Rafi, T. D. LaToza, K. Moran, and W. Lam, “Chatgpt
and software testing education: Promises & perils,” in 2023
IEEE International Conference on Software Testing, Verification and
Validation Workshops (ICSTW). IEEE, 2023, pp. 4130–4137.
[423] C. Geng, Z. Yihan, B. Pientka, and X. Si, “Can chatgpt pass an
introductory level functional language programming course?”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.02230, 2023.
[424] P . T. Nguyen, J. Di Rocco, C. Di Sipio, R. Rubei, D. Di Rus-
cio, and M. Di Penta, “Is this snippet written by chatgpt? an
empirical study with a codebert-based classifier,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.09381, 2023.
[425] H. Tian, W. Lu, T. O. Li, X. Tang, S.-C. Cheung, J. Klein, and T. F.
Bissyand´e, “Is chatgpt the ultimate programming assistant–how
far is it?” arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.11938, 2023.
[426] Y. Xue, H. Chen, G. R. Bai, R. Tairas, and Y. Huang, “Does chatgpt
help with introductory programming? an experiment of students
using chatgpt in cs1,” in Proceedings of the 46th International
Conference on Software Engineering: Software Engineering Education
and Training, 2024, pp. 331–341.
[427] J. M. Zhang, M. Harman, L. Ma, and Y. Liu, “Machine learning
testing: Survey, landscapes and horizons,” IEEE Transactions on
Software Engineering, vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 1–36, 2020.
[428] Q. Zhang, T. Zhang, J. Zhai, C. Fang, B. Yu, W. Sun, and Z. Chen,
“A critical review of large language model on software engineer-
ing: An example from chatgpt and automated program repair,”
2023.
[429] Y. Wu, Z. Li, J. M. Zhang, and Y. Liu, “Condefects: A new
dataset to address the data leakage concern for llm-based fault
localization and program repair,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.16253,
2023.
[430] Z. Wang, K. Liu, G. Li, and Z. Jin, “Hits: High-coverage llm-
based unit test generation via method slicing,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2408.11324, 2024.
[431] J. Liu, C. S. Xia, Y. Wang, and L. Zhang, “Is your code generated
by chatgpt really correct? rigorous evaluation of large language
models for code generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.01210 ,
2023.
[432] C. Niu, C. Li, V . Ng, and B. Luo, “Crosscodebench: Benchmarking
cross-task generalization of source code models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2302.04030, 2023.
[433] X. Du, M. Liu, K. Wang, H. Wang, J. Liu, Y. Chen, J. Feng, C. Sha,
X. Peng, and Y. Lou, “Evaluating large language models in class-
level code generation,” in 2024 IEEE/ACM 46th International Con-
ference on Software Engineering (ICSE) . IEEE Computer Society,
2024, pp. 982–994.
[434] X. Li, K. Dong, Y. Q. Lee, W. Xia, Y. Yin, H. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. Wang,
and R. Tang, “Coir: A comprehensive benchmark for code infor-
mation retrieval models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.02883, 2024.
[435] Z. Yang, J. Shi, J. He, and D. Lo, “Natural attack for pre-trained
models of code,” in Proceedings of the 44th International Conference
on Software Engineering, 2022, pp. 1482–1493.
[436] A. Jha and C. K. Reddy, “Codeattack: Code-based adversarial
attacks for pre-trained programming language models,” in Pro-
ceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 2023, pp.
14 892–14 900.
[437] R. Schuster, C. Song, E. Tromer, and V . Shmatikov, “You autocom-
plete me: Poisoning vulnerabilities in neural code completion,” in
30th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 21), 2021, pp.
1559–1575.
[438] Y. Wan, S. Zhang, H. Zhang, Y. Sui, G. Xu, D. Yao, H. Jin, and
L. Sun, “You see what i want you to see: poisoning vulnerabilities
in neural code search,” in Proceedings of the 30th ACM Joint
European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the
Foundations of Software Engineering, 2022, pp. 1233–1245.
[439] W. Sun, Y. Chen, G. Tao, C. Fang, X. Zhang, Q. Zhang, and
B. Luo, “Backdooring neural code search,” in Proceedings of the
61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers), 2023, pp. 9692–9708.

--- PDF PAGE 41 ---
41
[440] Z. Yang, B. Xu, J. M. Zhang, H. J. Kang, J. Shi, J. He, and D. Lo,
“Stealthy backdoor attack for code models,” IEEE Transactions on
Software Engineering, 2024.
[441] J. Li, Z. Li, H. Zhang, G. Li, Z. Jin, X. Hu, and X. Xia, “Poison
attack and poison detection on deep source code processing mod-
els,” ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology ,
2023.
[442] Y. Li, S. Liu, K. Chen, X. Xie, T. Zhang, and Y. Liu, “Multi-target
backdoor attacks for code pre-trained models,” in Proceedings
of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), ACL 2023, Toronto, Canada, July
9-14, 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2023, pp.
7236–7254.
[443] Z. Li, C. Wang, P . Ma, C. Liu, S. Wang, D. Wu, C. Gao, and Y. Liu,
“On extracting specialized code abilities from large language
models: A feasibility study,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 46th
International Conference on Software Engineering, 2024, pp. 1–13.
[444] W. Wang, H. Ning, G. Zhang, L. Liu, and Y. Wang, “Rocks cod-
ing, not development: A human-centric, experimental evaluation
of llm-supported se tasks,” Proceedings of the ACM on Software
Engineering, vol. 1, no. FSE, pp. 699–721, 2024.
[445] D. Nam, A. Macvean, V . Hellendoorn, B. Vasilescu, and B. Myers,
“Using an llm to help with code understanding,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on Software Engineer-
ing, 2024, pp. 1–13.
[446] R. Serafini, C. Otto, S. A. Horstmann, and A. Naiakshina,
“Chatgpt-resistant screening instrument for identifying non-
programmers,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 46th International
Conference on Software Engineering, 2024, pp. 1–13.
[447] M. H. Tanzil, J. Y. Khan, and G. Uddin, “Chatgpt incorrectness
detection in software reviews,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM
46th International Conference on Software Engineering , 2024, pp. 1–
12.
[448] Y. Li, Y. Liu, G. Deng, Y. Zhang, W. Song, L. Shi, K. Wang, Y. Li,
Y. Liu, and H. Wang, “Glitch tokens in large language models:
Categorization taxonomy and effective detection,” Proceedings of
the ACM on Software Engineering , vol. 1, no. FSE, pp. 2075–2097,
2024.
[449] W. Jiang, J. Zhai, S. Ma, X. Zhang, and C. Shen, “Costello:
Contrastive testing for embedding-based large language model
as a service embeddings,” Proceedings of the ACM on Software
Engineering, vol. 1, no. FSE, pp. 906–928, 2024.
[450] M. Yang, Y. Chen, Y. Liu, and L. Shi, “Distillseq: A framework
for safety alignment testing in large language models using
knowledge distillation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.10106, 2024.
[451] S. Hyun, M. Guo, and M. A. Babar, “Metal: Metamorphic testing
framework for analyzing large-language model qualities,” in
2024 IEEE Conference on Software Testing, Verification and Validation
(ICST). IEEE, 2024, pp. 117–128.
[452] A. Al-Kaswan, M. Izadi, and A. Van Deursen, “Traces of memo-
risation in large language models for code,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on Software Engineering ,
2024, pp. 1–12.
[453] Y. Liu, T. Le-Cong, R. Widyasari, C. Tantithamthavorn, L. Li, X.-
B. D. Le, and D. Lo, “Refining chatgpt-generated code: Charac-
terizing and mitigating code quality issues,” ACM Transactions
on Software Engineering and Methodology , vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 1–26,
2024.
[454] K. Jesse, T. Ahmed, P . T. Devanbu, and E. Morgan, “Large
language models and simple, stupid bugs,” in 2023 IEEE/ACM
20th International Conference on Mining Software Repositories (MSR).
IEEE, 2023, pp. 563–575.
[455] Z. Liu, Y. Tang, X. Luo, Y. Zhou, and L. F. Zhang, “No need to
lift a finger anymore? assessing the quality of code generation by
chatgpt,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 2024.
[456] O. J. Idialu, N. S. Mathews, R. Maipradit, J. M. Atlee, and M. Na-
gappan, “Whodunit: Classifying code as human authored or gpt-
4 generated-a case study on codechef problems,” in Proceedings
of the 21st International Conference on Mining Software Repositories ,
2024, pp. 394–406.
[457] A. Karmakar and R. Robbes, “Inspect: Intrinsic and systematic
probing evaluation for code transformers,” IEEE Transactions on
Software Engineering, 2023.
[458] D. Song, X. Xie, J. Song, D. Zhu, Y. Huang, F. Juefei-Xu, and
L. Ma, “Luna: A model-based universal analysis framework for
large language models,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineer-
ing, 2024.
[459] D. Yao, J. Zhang, I. G. Harris, and M. Carlsson, “Fuzzllm: A novel
and universal fuzzing framework for proactively discovering
jailbreak vulnerabilities in large language models,” in ICASSP
2024-2024 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
Signal Processing (ICASSP). IEEE, 2024, pp. 4485–4489.
[460] W. Wang, Y. Wang, S. Joty, and S. C. Hoi, “Rap-gen: Retrieval-
augmented patch generation with codet5 for automatic program
repair,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.06057, 2023.
[461] E. Shi, Y. Wang, H. Zhang, L. Du, S. Han, D. Zhang, and H. Sun,
“Towards efficient fine-tuning of pre-trained code models: An
experimental study and beyond,” in Proceedings of the 32nd ACM
SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis,
2023, pp. 39–51.
[462] M. Weyssow, X. Zhou, K. Kim, D. Lo, and H. Sahraoui, “Explor-
ing parameter-efficient fine-tuning techniques for code genera-
tion with large language models,”arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.10462,
2023.
[463] J. Liu, C. Sha, and X. Peng, “An empirical study of parameter-
efficient fine-tuning methods for pre-trained code models,” in
2023 38th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Soft-
ware Engineering (ASE). IEEE, 2023, pp. 397–408.
[464] T. Y. Zhuo, A. Zebaze, N. Suppattarachai, L. von Werra,
H. de Vries, Q. Liu, and N. Muennighoff, “Astraios: Parameter-
efficient instruction tuning code large language models,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2401.00788, 2024.
[465] S. Gao, H. Zhang, C. Gao, and C. Wang, “Keeping pace with ever-
increasing data: Towards continual learning of code intelligence
models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.03482, 2023.
[466] M. Weyssow, X. Zhou, K. Kim, D. Lo, and H. Sahraoui, “On
the usage of continual learning for out-of-distribution general-
ization in pre-trained language models of code,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.04106, 2023.
[467] S. Gao, W. Mao, C. Gao, L. Li, X. Hu, X. Xia, and M. R. Lyu,
“Learning in the wild: Towards leveraging unlabeled data for
effectively tuning pre-trained code models,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on Software Engineering ,
2024, pp. 1–13.
[468] A. Z. Yang, H. Tian, H. Ye, R. Martins, and C. L. Goues, “Security
vulnerability detection with multitask self-instructed fine-tuning
of large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.05892, 2024.
[469] P . Jana, P . Jha, H. Ju, G. Kishore, A. Mahajan, and V . Ganesh,
“Cotran: An llm-based code translator using reinforcement learn-
ing with feedback from compiler and symbolic execution,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2306.06755, 2023.
[470] W. Sun, C. Fang, Y. You, Y. Chen, Y. Liu, C. Wang, J. Zhang,
Q. Zhang, H. Qian, W. Zhaoet al., “A prompt learning framework
for source code summarization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.16066,
2023.
[471] J. Shi, Z. Yang, B. Xu, H. J. Kang, and D. Lo, “Compressing
pre-trained models of code into 3 mb,” in Proceedings of the
37th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software
Engineering, 2022, pp. 1–12.
[472] C.-Y. Su and C. McMillan, “Distilled gpt for source code sum-
marization,” Automated Software Engineering, vol. 31, no. 1, p. 22,
2024.
[473] M. Fu and C. Tantithamthavorn, “Linevul: A transformer-based
line-level vulnerability prediction,” in Proceedings of the 19th
International Conference on Mining Software Repositories , 2022, pp.
608–620.
[474] A. E. G ¨artner and D. G ¨ohlich, “Automated requirement con-
tradiction detection through formal logic and llms,” Automated
Software Engineering, vol. 31, no. 2, p. 49, 2024.
[475] A. F. Subahi, “Bert-based approach for greening software require-
ments engineering through non-functional requirements,” IEEE
Access, 2023.
[476] X. Luo, Y. Xue, Z. Xing, and J. Sun, “Prcbert: Prompt learning for
requirement classification using bert-based pretrained language
models,” in Proceedings of the 37th IEEE/ACM International Confer-
ence on Automated Software Engineering, 2022, pp. 1–13.
[477] A. El-Hajjami, N. Fafin, and C. Salinesi, “Which ai technique is
better to classify requirements? an experiment with svm, lstm,
and chatgpt,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.11547, 2023.
[478] C. Arora, J. Grundy, and M. Abdelrazek, “Advancing require-
ments engineering through generative ai: Assessing the role of
llms,” in Generative AI for Effective Software Development. Springer,
2024, pp. 129–148.

--- PDF PAGE 42 ---
42
[479] S. Hassani, “Enhancing legal compliance and regulation analysis
with large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.17522 ,
2024.
[480] A. Vogelsang, “From specifications to prompts: On the future
of generative llms in requirements engineering,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2408.09127, 2024.
[481] M. Fazelnia, V . Koscinski, S. Herzog, and M. Mirakhorli, “Lessons
from the use of natural language inference (nli) in requirements
engineering tasks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.05135, 2024.
[482] D. Jin, Z. Jin, X. Chen, and C. Wang, “Mare: Multi-agents collab-
oration framework for requirements engineering,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2405.03256, 2024.
[483] A. Pilone, P . Meirelles, F. Kon, and W. Maalej, “Multilingual
crowd-based requirements engineering using large language
models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.06505, 2024.
[484] K. Ronanki, B. Cabrero-Daniel, J. Horkoff, and C. Berger,
“Requirements engineering using generative ai: Prompts and
prompting patterns,” in Generative AI for Effective Software De-
velopment. Springer, 2024, pp. 109–127.
[485] B. Wang, C. Wang, P . Liang, B. Li, and C. Zeng, “How llms aid
in uml modeling: An exploratory study with novice analysts,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.17739, 2024.
[486] C. Tinnes, A. Welter, and S. Apel, “Leveraging large language
models for software model completion: Results from industrial
and public datasets,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.17651, 2024.
[487] J. Wei, X. Chen, H. Xiao, S. Tang, X. Xie, and Z. Li, “Natural
language processing-based requirements modeling: A case study
on problem frames,” in 2023 30th Asia-Pacific Software Engineering
Conference (APSEC). IEEE, 2023, pp. 191–200.
[488] Y. Li, J. Keung, X. Ma, C. Y. Chong, J. Zhang, and Y. Liao, “Llm-
based class diagram derivation from user stories with chain-
of-thought promptings,” in 2024 IEEE 48th Annual Computers,
Software, and Applications Conference (COMPSAC) . IEEE, 2024,
pp. 45–50.
[489] R. Sanyal, B. Ghoshal et al., “A hybrid approach to extract concep-
tual diagram from software requirements,” Science of Computer
Programming, p. 103186, 2024.
[490] S. G. Patil, T. Zhang, X. Wang, and J. E. Gonzalez, “Gorilla: Large
language model connected with massive apis,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.15334, 2023.
[491] H. Ding, V . Kumar, Y. Tian, Z. Wang, R. Kwiatkowski, X. Li,
M. K. Ramanathan, B. Ray, P . Bhatia, S. Sengupta et al., “A static
evaluation of code completion by large language models,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2306.03203, 2023.
[492] J. Y. Khan and G. Uddin, “Automatic detection and analysis of
technical debts in peer-review documentation of r packages,” in
2022 IEEE International Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution
and Reengineering (SANER). IEEE, 2022, pp. 765–776.
[493] M. Izadi, R. Gismondi, and G. Gousios, “Codefill: Multi-token
code completion by jointly learning from structure and naming
sequences,” in Proceedings of the 44th International Conference on
Software Engineering, 2022, pp. 401–412.
[494] N. Nashid, T. Shabani, P . Alian, and A. Mesbah, “Contextual
api completion for unseen repositories using llms,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2405.04600, 2024.
[495] Y. Ding, Z. Wang, W. Ahmad, H. Ding, M. Tan, N. Jain, M. K.
Ramanathan, R. Nallapati, P . Bhatia, D. Roth et al., “Crosscodee-
val: A diverse and multilingual benchmark for cross-file code
completion,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,
vol. 36, 2024.
[496] A. Eghbali and M. Pradel, “De-hallucinator: Iterative grounding
for llm-based code completion,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.01701 ,
2024.
[497] Z. Tang, J. Ge, S. Liu, T. Zhu, T. Xu, L. Huang, and B. Luo,
“Domain adaptive code completion via language models and de-
coupled domain databases,” in 2023 38th IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE) . IEEE, 2023,
pp. 421–433.
[498] M. Ochs, K. Narasimhan, and M. Mezini, “Evaluating and im-
proving transformers pre-trained on asts for code completion,” in
2023 IEEE International Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution
and Reengineering (SANER). IEEE, 2023, pp. 834–844.
[499] L. Gong, S. Wang, M. Elhoushi, and A. Cheung, “Evaluation of
llms on syntax-aware code fill-in-the-middle tasks,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.04814, 2024.
[500] R. Pudari and N. A. Ernst, “From copilot to pilot: Towards ai sup-
ported software development,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.04142 ,
2023.
[501] L. Zhang, Y. Li, J. Li, X. Xia, J. Yang, R. Luo, M. Wang, L. Chen,
J. Liu, and M. Yang, “Hierarchical context pruning: Optimizing
real-world code completion with repository-level pretrained code
llms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.18294, 2024.
[502] T. Dinh, J. Zhao, S. Tan, R. Negrinho, L. Lausen, S. Zha, and
G. Karypis, “Large language models of code fail at completing
code with potential bugs,” Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems, vol. 36, 2024.
[503] M. Zhang, B. Yuan, H. Li, and K. Xu, “Llm-cloud complete:
Leveraging cloud computing for efficient large language model-
based code completion,” Journal of Artificial Intelligence General
science (JAIGS) ISSN: 3006-4023, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 295–326, 2024.
[504] J. A. Prenner and R. Robbes, “Making the most of small soft-
ware engineering datasets with modern machine learning,” IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering, vol. 48, no. 12, pp. 5050–5067,
2021.
[505] J.-B. D ¨oderlein, M. Acher, D. E. Khelladi, and B. Combemale,
“Piloting copilot and codex: Hot temperature, cold prompts, or
black magic?” arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.14699, 2022.
[506] H. Tan, Q. Luo, L. Jiang, Z. Zhan, J. Li, H. Zhang, and Y. Zhang,
“Prompt-based code completion via multi-retrieval augmented
generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.07530, 2024.
[507] K. Deng, J. Liu, H. Zhu, C. Liu, J. Li, J. Wang, P . Zhao, C. Zhang,
Y. Wu, X. Yin et al., “R2c2-coder: Enhancing and benchmarking
real-world repository-level code completion abilities of code
large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.01359, 2024.
[508] T. Liu, C. Xu, and J. McAuley, “Repobench: Benchmarking
repository-level code auto-completion systems,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2306.03091, 2023.
[509] J. Li, R. Huang, W. Li, K. Yao, and W. Tan, “Toward less hidden
cost of code completion with acceptance and ranking models,”
in 2021 IEEE International Conference on Software Maintenance and
Evolution (ICSME). IEEE, 2021, pp. 195–205.
[510] Z. Sun, X. Du, F. Song, S. Wang, and L. Li, “When neural code
completion models size up the situation: Attaining cheaper and
faster completion through dynamic model inference,” in Proceed-
ings of the IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on Software
Engineering, 2024, pp. 1–12.
[511] A. Kabir, S. Wang, Y. Tian, M. Asaduzzaman, W. Zhang et al. ,
“Zs4c: Zero-shot synthesis of compilable code for incomplete
code snippets using chatgpt,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.14279 ,
2024.
[512] S. Moon, Y. Song, H. Chae, D. Kang, T. Kwon, K. T.-i. Ong, S.-w.
Hwang, and J. Yeo, “Coffee: Boost your code llms by fixing bugs
with feedback,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.07215, 2023.
[513] M. Dilhara, A. Bellur, T. Bryksin, and D. Dig, “Unprecedented
code change automation: The fusion of llms and transformation
by example,” Proceedings of the ACM on Software Engineering ,
vol. 1, no. FSE, pp. 631–653, 2024.
[514] S. Wang, B. Lin, Z. Sun, M. Wen, Y. Liu, Y. Lei, and X. Mao, “Two
birds with one stone: Boosting code generation and code search
via a generative adversarial network,” Proceedings of the ACM on
Programming Languages, vol. 7, no. OOPSLA2, pp. 486–515, 2023.
[515] A. Buscemi, “A comparative study of code generation using
chatgpt 3.5 across 10 programming languages,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2308.04477, 2023.
[516] W. Zhang, T. Fu, T. Yuan, G. Zhang, D. Chen, and J. Wang, “A
lightweight framework for adaptive retrieval in code completion
with critique model,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.10263, 2024.
[517] M. L. Siddiq, B. Casey, and J. Santos, “A lightweight
framework for high-quality code generation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.08220, 2023.
[518] Y. Li, J. Shi, and Z. Zhang, “A novel approach for rapiddevelop-
ment based on chatgpt and prompt engineering,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.13115, 2023.
[519] M. T. R. Laskar, M. S. Bari, M. Rahman, M. A. H. Bhuiyan,
S. Joty, and J. X. Huang, “A systematic study and comprehensive
evaluation of chatgpt on benchmark datasets,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.18486, 2023.
[520] N. Rao, J. Tsay, K. Kate, V . Hellendoorn, and M. Hirzel, “Ai for
low-code for ai,” in Proceedings of the 29th International Conference
on Intelligent User Interfaces, 2024, pp. 837–852.
[521] V . Dibia, A. Fourney, G. Bansal, F. Poursabzi-Sangdeh, H. Liu,
and S. Amershi, “Aligning offline metrics and human judgments

--- PDF PAGE 43 ---
43
of value of ai-pair programmers,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.16494,
2022.
[522] D. Huang, Z. Nan, X. Hu, P . Jin, S. Peng, Y. Wen, R. Zhang, Z. Du,
Q. Guo, Y. Pu et al. , “Anpl: Compiling natural programs with
interactive decomposition.” CoRR, 2023.
[523] K. Okuda and S. Amarasinghe, “Askit: Unified programming
interface for programming with large language models,” in 2024
IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Code Generation and Opti-
mization (CGO). IEEE, 2024, pp. 41–54.
[524] G. Antal, R. Voz ´ar, and R. Ferenc, “Assessing gpt-4-vision’s
capabilities in uml-based code generation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.14370, 2024.
[525] F. Tambon, A. Nikanjam, F. Khomh, and G. Antoniol, “Assessing
programming task difficulty for efficient evaluation of large
language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21227, 2024.
[526] M. F. A. Khan, M. Ramsdell, E. Falor, and H. Karimi, “Assessing
the promise and pitfalls of chatgpt for automated code genera-
tion,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.02640, 2023.
[527] N. Alshahwan, M. Harman, I. Harper, A. Marginean, S. Sengupta,
and E. Wang, “Assured llm-based software engineering,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2402.04380, 2024.
[528] Z. Ji, P . Ma, Z. Li, and S. Wang, “Benchmarking and explaining
large language model-based code generation: A causality-centric
approach,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06680, 2023.
[529] D. Ghosh Paul, H. Zhu, and I. Bayley, “Benchmarks and metrics
for evaluations of code generation: A critical review,” arXiv e-
prints, pp. arXiv–2406, 2024.
[530] D. Huang, Q. Bu, J. Zhang, X. Xie, J. Chen, and H. Cui, “Bias
assessment and mitigation in llm-based code generation,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2309.14345, 2023.
[531] A. K. Singh, Y. Yang, K. Tirumala, M. Elhoushi, and A. S.
Morcos, “Brevity is the soul of wit: Pruning long files for code
generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.00434, 2024.
[532] M. Li, A. Mishra, and U. Mujumdar, “Bridging the lan-
guage gap: Enhancing multilingual prompt-based code genera-
tion in llms via zero-shot cross-lingual transfer,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2408.09701, 2024.
[533] L. Zhong and Z. Wang, “Can chatgpt replace stackoverflow? a
study on robustness and reliability of large language model code
generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.10335, 2023.
[534] D. Nichols, J. H. Davis, Z. Xie, A. Rajaram, and A. Bhatele,
“Can large language models write parallel code?” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2401.12554, 2024.
[535] E. Jones and J. Steinhardt, “Capturing failures of large language
models via human cognitive biases,” Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems, vol. 35, pp. 11 785–11 799, 2022.
[536] Z. Wang, J. Li, G. Li, and Z. Jin, “Chatcoder: Chat-based re-
fine requirement improves llms’ code generation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.00272, 2023.
[537] C. Sun, Y. Sheng, O. Padon, and C. Barrett, “Clover: Clo sed-
loop ver ifiable code generation,” in International Symposium on
AI Verification. Springer, 2024, pp. 134–155.
[538] A. Jain, C. Adiole, S. Chaudhuri, T. Reps, and C. Jermaine,
“Coarse-tuning models of code with reinforcement learning feed-
back,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18341, 2023.
[539] P . Bareiß, B. Souza, M. d’Amorim, and M. Pradel, “Code gen-
eration tools (almost) for free? a study of few-shot, pre-trained
language models on code,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.01335, 2022.
[540] T. Ridnik, D. Kredo, and I. Friedman, “Code generation with
alphacodium: From prompt engineering to flow engineering,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.08500, 2024.
[541] Y.-D. Tsai, M. Liu, and H. Ren, “Code less, align more: Efficient
llm fine-tuning for code generation with data pruning,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2407.05040, 2024.
[542] J. Chen, X. Hu, Z. Li, C. Gao, X. Xia, and D. Lo, “Code search
is all you need? improving code suggestions with code search,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on
Software Engineering, 2024, pp. 1–13.
[543] S. Zhou, U. Alon, S. Agarwal, and G. Neubig, “Codebertscore:
Evaluating code generation with pretrained models of code,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.05527, 2023.
[544] H. Le, H. Chen, A. Saha, A. Gokul, D. Sahoo, and S. Joty,
“Codechain: Towards modular code generation through chain
of self-revisions with representative sub-modules,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.08992, 2023.
[545] V . Murali, C. Maddila, I. Ahmad, M. Bolin, D. Cheng, N. Ghor-
bani, R. Fernandez, and N. Nagappan, “Codecompose: A large-
scale industrial deployment of ai-assisted code authoring,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2305.12050, 2023.
[546] D. Huang, Q. Bu, and H. Cui, “Codecot and beyond: Learn-
ing to program and test like a developer,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2308.08784, 2023.
[547] K. Du, R. Rui, H. Chai, L. Fu, W. Xia, Y. Wang, R. Tang, Y. Yu,
and W. Zhang, “Codegrag: Extracting composed syntax graphs
for retrieval augmented cross-lingual code generation,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2405.02355, 2024.
[548] P . Li, T. Sun, Q. Tang, H. Yan, Y. Wu, X. Huang, and X. Qiu,
“Codeie: Large code generation models are better few-shot infor-
mation extractors,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.05711, 2023.
[549] T. Zhang, T. Yu, T. Hashimoto, M. Lewis, W.-t. Yih, D. Fried,
and S. Wang, “Coder reviewer reranking for code generation,”
in International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2023, pp.
41 832–41 846.
[550] Y. Dong, J. Ding, X. Jiang, G. Li, Z. Li, and Z. Jin, “Codescore:
Evaluating code generation by learning code execution,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2301.09043, 2023.
[551] R. Yen, J. Zhu, S. Suh, H. Xia, and J. Zhao, “Coladder: Supporting
programmers with hierarchical code generation in multi-level
abstraction,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08699, 2023.
[552] Y. Chen, Y. Liu, F. Meng, Y. Chen, J. Xu, and J. Zhou, “Comments
as natural logic pivots: Improve code generation via comment
perspective,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.07549, 2024.
[553] N. Nascimento, P . Alencar, and D. Cowan, “Comparing soft-
ware developers with chatgpt: An empirical investigation,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2305.11837, 2023.
[554] C. W. Tan, S. Guo, M. F. Wong, and C. N. Hang, “Copilot for
xcode: Exploring ai-assisted programming by prompting cloud-
based large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.14349 ,
2023.
[555] F. Wu, X. Liu, and C. Xiao, “Deceptprompt: Exploiting llm-driven
code generation via adversarial natural language instructions,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.04730, 2023.
[556] T. X. Olausson, J. P . Inala, C. Wang, J. Gao, and A. Solar-Lezama,
“Demystifying gpt self-repair for code generation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2306.09896, 2023.
[557] J. Li, G. Li, Y. Zhao, Y. Li, Z. Jin, H. Zhu, H. Liu, K. Liu, L. Wang,
Z. Fang et al., “Deveval: Evaluating code generation in practical
software projects,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.06401, 2024.
[558] K. Li, S. Hong, C. Fu, Y. Zhang, and M. Liu, “Discriminating
human-authored from chatgpt-generated code via discernable
feature analysis,” in 2023 IEEE 34th International Symposium on
Software Reliability Engineering Workshops (ISSREW). IEEE, 2023,
pp. 120–127.
[559] J. Li and R. Mooney, “Distilling algorithmic reasoning
from llms via explaining solution programs,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.08148, 2024.
[560] Y. Lai, C. Li, Y. Wang, T. Zhang, R. Zhong, L. Zettlemoyer, W.-t.
Yih, D. Fried, S. Wang, and T. Yu, “Ds-1000: A natural and reliable
benchmark for data science code generation,” in International
Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2023, pp. 18 319–18 345.
[561] J. Li, G. Li, Y. Li, and Z. Jin, “Enabling programming thinking in
large language models toward code generation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.06599, 2023.
[562] K. Yang, X. Mao, S. Wang, T. Zhang, B. Lin, Y. Wang, Y. Qin,
Z. Zhang, and X. Mao, “Enhancing code intelligence tasks with
chatgpt,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.15202, 2023.
[563] B. Huang, S. Lu, W. Chen, X. Wan, and N. Duan, “Enhancing
large language models in coding through multi-perspective self-
consistency,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.17272, 2023.
[564] A. Shapkin, D. Litvinov, and T. Bryksin, “Entity-augmented code
generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.08976, 2023.
[565] A. Patel, S. Reddy, D. Bahdanau, and P . Dasigi, “Evaluating in-
context learning of libraries for code generation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.09635, 2023.
[566] Y. Assogba and D. Ren, “Evaluating long range dependency han-
dling in code generation models using multi-step key retrieval,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21049, 2024.
[567] B. Yetis ¸tiren, I. ¨Ozsoy, M. Ayerdem, and E. T ¨uz ¨un, “Evaluating
the code quality of ai-assisted code generation tools: An empirical
study on github copilot, amazon codewhisperer, and chatgpt,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.10778, 2023.
[568] D. Wang, J. Zhao, H. Pei, S. Tan, and S. Zha, “Fine-tuning
language models for joint rewriting and completion of code with

--- PDF PAGE 44 ---
44
potential bugs,” in Findings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics ACL 2024, 2024, pp. 15 854–15 868.
[569] X. Ren, X. Ye, D. Zhao, Z. Xing, and X. Yang, “From misuse
to mastery: Enhancing code generation with knowledge-driven
ai chaining,” in 2023 38th IEEE/ACM International Conference on
Automated Software Engineering (ASE). IEEE, 2023, pp. 976–987.
[570] H. To, M. Nguyen, and N. Bui, “Functional overlap reranking
for neural code generation,” in Findings of the Association for
Computational Linguistics ACL 2024, 2024, pp. 3686–3704.
[571] M. Fu and C. Tantithamthavorn, “Gpt2sp: A transformer-based
agile story point estimation approach,” IEEE Transactions on
Software Engineering, vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 611–625, 2022.
[572] G. Dong, H. Yuan, K. Lu, C. Li, M. Xue, D. Liu, W. Wang, Z. Yuan,
C. Zhou, and J. Zhou, “How abilities in large language models
are affected by supervised fine-tuning data composition,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2310.05492, 2023.
[573] M. Kazemitabaar, X. Hou, A. Henley, B. J. Ericson, D. Weintrop,
and T. Grossman, “How novices use llm-based code generators
to solve cs1 coding tasks in a self-paced learning environment,”
in Proceedings of the 23rd Koli Calling International Conference on
Computing Education Research, 2023, pp. 1–12.
[574] A. Malkadi, A. Tayeb, and S. Haiduc, “Improving code extraction
from coding screencasts using a code-aware encoder-decoder
model,” in 2023 38th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Au-
tomated Software Engineering (ASE). IEEE, 2023, pp. 1492–1504.
[575] S. Ugare, T. Suresh, H. Kang, S. Misailovic, and G. Singh, “Im-
proving llm code generation with grammar augmentation,”arXiv
preprint arXiv:2403.01632, 2024.
[576] S. K. Lahiri, S. Fakhoury, A. Naik, G. Sakkas, S. Chakraborty,
M. Musuvathi, P . Choudhury, C. von Veh, J. P . Inala, C. Wang
et al. , “Interactive code generation via test-driven user-intent
formalization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.05950, 2022.
[577] W.-D. Li and K. Ellis, “Is programming by example solved by
llms?” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.08316, 2024.
[578] H. Koziolek, S. Gr ¨uner, R. Hark, V . Ashiwal, S. Linsbauer, and
N. Eskandani, “Llm-based and retrieval-augmented control code
generation,” in Proc. 1st Int. Workshop on Large Language Models
for Coffice (LLM4Code) at ICSE, vol. 2024, 2024.
[579] M. Chen, H. Tian, Z. Liu, X. Ren, and J. Sun, “Jumpcoder:
Go beyond autoregressive coder via online modification,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2401.07870, 2024.
[580] T. Huang, Z. Sun, Z. Jin, G. Li, and C. Lyu, “Knowledge-aware
code generation with large language models,” in Proceedings of
the 32nd IEEE/ACM International Conference on Program Compre-
hension, 2024, pp. 52–63.
[581] A. Ni, P . Yin, Y. Zhao, M. Riddell, T. Feng, R. Shen, S. Yin, Y. Liu,
S. Yavuz, C. Xiong et al., “L2ceval: Evaluating language-to-code
generation capabilities of large language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2309.17446, 2023.
[582] J. Xu, Z. Liu, N. A. V . Suryanarayanan, and H. Iba, “Large
language models synergize with automated machine learning,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.03727, 2024.
[583] X. Wang, H. Peng, R. Jabbarvand, and H. Ji, “Leti: Learn-
ing to generate from textual interactions,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.10314, 2023.
[584] X. Hu, K. Kuang, J. Sun, H. Yang, and F. Wu, “Leveraging
print debugging to improve code generation in large language
models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.05319, 2024.
[585] S. Ouyang, J. M. Zhang, M. Harman, and M. Wang, “Llm is
like a box of chocolates: the non-determinism of chatgpt in code
generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.02828, 2023.
[586] N. Jain, T. Zhang, W.-L. Chiang, J. E. Gonzalez, K. Sen, and
I. Stoica, “Llm-assisted code cleaning for training accurate code
generators,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.14904, 2023.
[587] Q. Gu, “Llm-based code generation method for golang compiler
testing,” in Proceedings of the 31st ACM Joint European Software En-
gineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software
Engineering, 2023, pp. 2201–2203.
[588] D. Hendrycks, S. Basart, S. Kadavath, M. Mazeika, A. Arora,
E. Guo, C. Burns, S. Puranik, H. He, D. Song et al. , “Mea-
suring coding challenge competence with apps,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2105.09938, 2021.
[589] S. Hong, X. Zheng, J. Chen, Y. Cheng, J. Wang, C. Zhang,
Z. Wang, S. K. S. Yau, Z. Lin, L. Zhou et al. , “Metagpt: Meta
programming for multi-agent collaborative framework,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2308.00352, 2023.
[590] B. Chen, M. Zhu, B. Dolan-Gavitt, M. Shafique, and S. Garg,
“Model cascading for code: Reducing inference costs with
model cascading for llm based code generation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2405.15842, 2024.
[591] J. Li, P . Chen, and J. Jia, “Motcoder: Elevating large language
models with modular of thought for challenging programming
tasks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.15960, 2023.
[592] Z. Dai, C. Yao, W. Han, Y. Yuan, Z. Gao, and J. Chen, “Mpcoder:
Multi-user personalized code generator with explicit and implicit
style representation learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.17255 ,
2024.
[593] S. Wang, L. Ding, L. Shen, Y. Luo, B. Du, and D. Tao, “Oop:
Object-oriented programming evaluation benchmark for large
language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.06628, 2024.
[594] C. Arora, A. I. Sayeed, S. Licorish, F. Wang, and C. Treude,
“Optimizing large language model hyperparameters for code
generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.10577, 2024.
[595] Z. Fan, H. Ruan, S. Mechtaev, and A. Roychoudhury, “Oracle-
guided program selection from large language models,” 2018.
[596] W. Zheng, S. Sharan, A. K. Jaiswal, K. Wang, Y. Xi, D. Xu, and
Z. Wang, “Outline, then details: Syntactically guided coarse-
to-fine code generation,” in International Conference on Machine
Learning. PMLR, 2023, pp. 42 403–42 419.
[597] D. Nichols, P . Polasam, H. Menon, A. Marathe, T. Gamblin, and
A. Bhatele, “Performance-aligned llms for generating fast code,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.18864, 2024.
[598] D. Zan, B. Chen, Y. Gong, J. Cao, F. Zhang, B. Wu, B. Guan,
Y. Yin, and Y. Wang, “Private-library-oriented code generation
with large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15370 ,
2023.
[599] T. Pegolotti, E. Frantar, D. Alistarh, and M. P ¨uschel, “Qigen:
Generating efficient kernels for quantized inference on large
language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.03738, 2023.
[600] M. L. Siddiq, S. Dristi, J. Saha, and J. Santos, “Quality as-
sessment of prompts used in code generation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.10155, 2024.
[601] M. Riddell, A. Ni, and A. Cohan, “Quantifying contamination
in evaluating code generation capabilities of language models,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.04811, 2024.
[602] S. Wang, Z. Li, H. Qian, C. Yang, Z. Wang, M. Shang, V . Kumar,
S. Tan, B. Ray, P . Bhatiaet al., “Recode: Robustness evaluation of
code generation models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10264, 2022.
[603] D. Kang, K. J. Seo, and T. Kim, “Revisiting the impact of pursuing
modularity for code generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.11406,
2024.
[604] X. Wu, N. Cheriere, C. Zhang, and D. Narayanan, “Rustgen: An
augmentation approach for generating compilable rust code with
large language models.”
[605] H. Su, J. Kasai, C. H. Wu, W. Shi, T. Wang, J. Xin, R. Zhang, M. Os-
tendorf, L. Zettlemoyer, N. A. Smith et al., “Selective annotation
makes language models better few-shot learners,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2209.01975, 2022.
[606] Y. Tian and T. Zhang, “Selective prompt anchoring for code
generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.09121, 2024.
[607] L. Zheng, J. Yuan, Z. Zhang, H. Yang, and L. Kong, “Self-infilling
code generation,” in Forty-first International Conference on Machine
Learning, 2023.
[608] E. Zelikman, E. Lorch, L. Mackey, and A. T. Kalai, “Self-taught
optimizer (stop): Recursively self-improving code generation,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.02304, 2023.
[609] S. Jiang, Y. Wang, and Y. Wang, “Selfevolve: A code evo-
lution framework via large language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2306.02907, 2023.
[610] C. Zhu-Tian, Z. Xiong, X. Yao, and E. Glassman, “Sketch then
generate: Providing incremental user feedback and guiding llm
code generation through language-oriented code sketches,”arXiv
preprint arXiv:2405.03998, 2024.
[611] J. Li, G. Li, Y. Li, and Z. Jin, “Structured chain-of-thought
prompting for code generation,” ACM Transactions on Software
Engineering and Methodology, 2023.
[612] C. E. Jimenez, J. Yang, A. Wettig, S. Yao, K. Pei, O. Press, and
K. Narasimhan, “Swe-bench: Can language models resolve real-
world github issues?” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06770, 2023.
[613] L. Sarker, M. Downing, A. Desai, and T. Bultan, “Syntac-
tic robustness for llm-based code generation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.01535, 2024.

--- PDF PAGE 45 ---
45
[614] C. Wang, J. Zhang, Y. Feng, T. Li, W. Sun, Y. Liu, and X. Peng,
“Teaching code llms to use autocompletion tools in repository-
level code generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.06391, 2024.
[615] Z. Tian and J. Chen, “Test-case-driven programming understand-
ing in large language models for better code generation,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2309.16120, 2023.
[616] M. Hassid, T. Remez, J. Gehring, R. Schwartz, and Y. Adi,
“The larger the better? improved llm code-generation via budget
reallocation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.00725, 2024.
[617] A. Tarassow, “The potential of llms for coding with low-resource
and domain-specific programming languages,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.13018, 2023.
[618] X.-Y. Li, J.-T. Xue, Z. Xie, and M. Li, “Think outside the code:
Brainstorming boosts large language models in code generation,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10679, 2023.
[619] Z.-C. Lyu, X.-Y. Li, Z. Xie, and M. Li, “Top pass: Improve code
generation by pass@ k-maximized code ranking,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2408.05715, 2024.
[620] S. Fakhoury, S. Chakraborty, M. Musuvathi, and S. K. Lahiri,
“Towards generating functionally correct code edits from natu-
ral language issue descriptions,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.03816,
2023.
[621] D. Busch, A. Bainczyk, and B. Steffen, “Towards llm-based sys-
tem migration in language-driven engineering,” in International
Conference on Engineering of Computer-Based Systems . Springer,
2023, pp. 191–200.
[622] J. Wu, E. Schoop, A. Leung, T. Barik, J. P . Bigham, and J. Nichols,
“Uicoder: Finetuning large language models to generate user
interface code through automated feedback,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.07739, 2024.
[623] M. Allamanis, S. Panthaplackel, and P . Yin, “Unsupervised eval-
uation of code llms with round-trip correctness,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.08699, 2024.
[624] S. Thakur, B. Ahmad, H. Pearce, B. Tan, B. Dolan-Gavitt, R. Karri,
and S. Garg, “Verigen: A large language model for verilog code
generation,” ACM Transactions on Design Automation of Electronic
Systems, vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 1–31, 2024.
[625] L. Gong, J. Zhang, M. Wei, H. Zhang, and Z. Huang, “What is
the intended usage context of this model? an exploratory study
of pre-trained models on various model repositories,” ACM
Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, vol. 32, no. 3,
pp. 1–57, 2023.
[626] D. Zan, B. Chen, Z. Lin, B. Guan, Y. Wang, and J.-G. Lou,
“When language model meets private library,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2210.17236, 2022.
[627] L. Guo, Y. Wang, E. Shi, W. Zhong, H. Zhang, J. Chen, R. Zhang,
Y. Ma, and Z. Zheng, “When to stop? towards efficient code
generation in llms with excess token prevention,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.20042, 2024.
[628] J. Liu, X. Tang, L. Li, P . Chen, and Y. Liu, “Which is a better
programming assistant? a comparative study between chatgpt
and stack overflow,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.13851, 2023.
[629] M. A. M. Khan, M. S. Bari, X. L. Do, W. Wang, M. R. Parvez,
and S. Joty, “xcodeeval: A large scale multilingual multitask
benchmark for code understanding, generation, translation and
retrieval,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03004, 2023.
[630] G. Yang, Y. Zhou, X. Chen, X. Zhang, T. Han, and T. Chen,
“Exploitgen: Template-augmented exploit code generation based
on codebert,” Journal of Systems and Software , vol. 197, p. 111577,
2023.
[631] Y. Zhu, J. Li, G. Li, Y. Zhao, Z. Jin, and H. Mei, “Hot or
cold? adaptive temperature sampling for code generation with
large language models,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, vol. 38, no. 1, 2024, pp. 437–445.
[632] A. Varkey, S. Jiang, and W. Huang, “Codecse: A simple multilin-
gual model for code and comment sentence embeddings,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2407.06360, 2024.
[633] Y. Li, T. Zhang, X. Luo, H. Cai, S. Fang, and D. Yuan, “Do pre-
trained language models indeed understand software engineer-
ing tasks?” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 2023.
[634] D. Li, Y. Shen, R. Jin, Y. Mao, K. Wang, and W. Chen, “Generation-
augmented query expansion for code retrieval,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2212.10692, 2022.
[635] S. Jain, A. Dora, K. S. Sam, and P . Singh, “Llm agents improve
semantic code search,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.11058, 2024.
[636] A. Saieva, S. Chakraborty, and G. Kaiser, “On contrastive learning
of semantic similarity forcode to code search,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.03843, 2023.
[637] G. Fan, S. Chen, C. Gao, J. Xiao, T. Zhang, and Z. Feng, “Rapid:
Zero-shot domain adaptation for code search with pre-trained
models,” ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodol-
ogy, vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 1–35, 2024.
[638] H. Li, X. Zhou, and Z. Shen, “Rewriting the code: A simple
method for large language model augmented code search,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2401.04514, 2024.
[639] Y. Mao, C. Wan, Y. Jiang, and X. Gu, “Self-supervised query
reformulation for code search,” in Proceedings of the 31st ACM
Joint European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on
the Foundations of Software Engineering, 2023, pp. 363–374.
[640] Y. Wang, L. Guo, E. Shi, W. Chen, J. Chen, W. Zhong, M. Wang,
H. Li, H. Zhang, Z. Lyu et al. , “You augment me: Exploring
chatgpt-based data augmentation for semantic code search,” in
2023 IEEE International Conference on Software Maintenance and
Evolution (ICSME). IEEE, 2023, pp. 14–25.
[641] S. Wang, M. Geng, B. Lin, Z. Sun, M. Wen, Y. Liu, L. Li, T. F.
Bissyand´e, and X. Mao, “Natural language to code: How far are
we?” in Proceedings of the 31st ACM Joint European Software En-
gineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software
Engineering, 2023, pp. 375–387.
[642] S. S. Dvivedi, V . Vijay, S. L. R. Pujari, S. Lodh, and D. Kumar,
“A comparative analysis of large language models for code
documentation generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.10349, 2023.
[643] A. R. Sadik, A. Ceravola, F. Joublin, and J. Patra, “Analysis of
chatgpt on source code,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00597, 2023.
[644] R. Haldar and J. Hockenmaier, “Analyzing the performance of
large language models on code summarization,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.08018, 2024.
[645] J. Gu, P . Salza, and H. C. Gall, “Assemble foundation models for
automatic code summarization,” in 2022 IEEE International Con-
ference on Software Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering (SANER) .
IEEE, 2022, pp. 935–946.
[646] J. Zhao, X. Chen, G. Yang, and Y. Shen, “Automatic smart contract
comment generation via large language models and in-context
learning,” Information and Software Technology, vol. 168, p. 107405,
2024.
[647] J. Kumar and S. Chimalakonda, “Code summarization without
direct access to code-towards exploring federated llms for soft-
ware engineering,” in Proceedings of the 28th International Confer-
ence on Evaluation and Assessment in Software Engineering , 2024,
pp. 100–109.
[648] S. Gao, X.-C. Wen, C. Gao, W. Wang, and M. R. Lyu, “Construct-
ing effective in-context demonstration for code intelligence tasks:
An empirical study,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07575, p. 17, 2023.
[649] C.-Y. Su, A. Bansal, Y. Huang, T. J.-J. Li, and C. McMil-
lan, “Context-aware code summary generation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2408.09006, 2024.
[650] S. Oh and S. Yoo, “Csa-trans: Code structure aware transformer
for ast,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.05767, 2024.
[651] B. Poudel, A. Cook, S. Traore, and S. Ameli, “Documint: Doc-
string generation for python using small language models,”arXiv
preprint arXiv:2405.10243, 2024.
[652] Y. Virk, P . Devanbu, and T. Ahmed, “Enhancing trust in llm-
generated code summaries with calibrated confidence scores,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.19318, 2024.
[653] S. Arakelyan, R. Das, Y. Mao, and X. Ren, “Exploring distri-
butional shifts in large language models for code analysis,” in
Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, 2023, pp. 16 298–16 314.
[654] S. Pordanesh and B. Tan, “Exploring the efficacy of large lan-
guage models (gpt-4) in binary reverse engineering,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2406.06637, 2024.
[655] A. Al-Kaswan, T. Ahmed, M. Izadi, A. A. Sawant, P . Devanbu,
and A. van Deursen, “Extending source code pre-trained lan-
guage models to summarise decompiled binaries,” in 2023 IEEE
International Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution and Reengi-
neering (SANER). IEEE, 2023, pp. 260–271.
[656] S. Kang, L. Milliken, and S. Yoo, “Identifying inaccurate descrip-
tions in llm-generated code comments via test execution,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2406.14836, 2024.
[657] B. Szalontai, G. Szalay, T. M ´arton, A. Sike, B. Pint ´er, and
T. Gregorics, “Large language models for code summarization,”
2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.19032

--- PDF PAGE 46 ---
46
[658] H. Lu, H. Peng, G. Nan, J. Cui, C. Wang, and W. Jin, “Mal-
sight: Exploring malicious source code and benign pseudocode
for iterative binary malware summarization,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.18379, 2024.
[659] I. Saberi, F. Fard, and F. Chen, “Multilingual adapter-based
knowledge aggregation on code summarization for low-resource
languages,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.07854, 2023.
[660] Y. Wang, X. Li, T. Nguyen, S. Wang, C. Ni, and L. Ding, “Natural
is the best: Model-agnostic code simplification for pre-trained
large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.11196, 2024.
[661] K. Shi, D. Altınb ¨uken, S. Anand, M. Christodorescu,
K. Gr ¨unwedel, A. Koenings, S. Naidu, A. Pathak, M. Rasi,
F. Ribeiro et al. , “Natural language outlines for code: Literate
programming in the llm era,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.04820 ,
2024.
[662] F. Chen, F. H. Fard, D. Lo, and T. Bryksin, “On the transferability
of pre-trained language models for low-resource programming
languages,” in Proceedings of the 30th IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Program Comprehension, 2022, pp. 401–412.
[663] C.-Y. Su and C. McMillan, “Semantic similarity loss for neural
source code summarization,” Journal of Software: Evolution and
Process, p. e2706, 2023.
[664] E. Shi, F. Zhang, Y. Wang, B. Chen, L. Du, H. Zhang, S. Han,
D. Zhang, and H. Sun, “Sotana: The open-source software devel-
opment assistant,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.13416, 2023.
[665] W. Sun, Y. Miao, Y. Li, H. Zhang, C. Fang, Y. Liu, G. Deng, Y. Liu,
and Z. Chen, “Source code summarization in the era of large
language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.07959, 2024.
[666] Y. Wang, Y. Huang, D. Guo, H. Zhang, and Z. Zheng, “Spar-
secoder: Identifier-aware sparse transformer for file-level code
summarization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.14727, 2024.
[667] G. Fan, S. Chen, H. Wu, C. Gao, J. Xiao, X. Xue, and Z. Feng,
“Dialog summarization for software collaborative platform via
tuning pre-trained models,” Journal of Systems and Software , vol.
204, p. 111763, 2023.
[668] Y. Shen, X. Ju, X. Chen, and G. Yang, “Bash comment generation
via data augmentation and semantic-aware codebert,” Automated
Software Engineering, vol. 31, no. 1, p. 30, 2024.
[669] J. Shin, C. Tang, T. Mohati, M. Nayebi, S. Wang, and H. Hemmati,
“Prompt engineering or fine tuning: An empirical assessment of
large language models in automated software engineering tasks,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.10508, 2023.
[670] M. Xue, A. Andrzejak, and M. Leuther, “An interpretable error
correction method for enhancing code-to-code translation,” in
The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations.
[671] G. Yang, Y. Zhou, X. Zhang, X. Chen, T. Han, and T. Chen,
“Assessing and improving syntactic adversarial robustness
of pre-trained models for code translation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.18587, 2023.
[672] N. D. Bui, H. Le, Y. Wang, J. Li, A. D. Gotmare, and S. C. Hoi,
“Codetf: One-stop transformer library for state-of-the-art code
llm,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00029, 2023.
[673] W. Yan, Y. Tian, Y. Li, Q. Chen, and W. Wang, “Codetransocean:
A comprehensive multilingual benchmark for code translation,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.04951, 2023.
[674] M. Bhattarai, J. E. Santos, S. Jones, A. Biswas, B. Alexandrov,
and D. O’Malley, “Enhancing code translation in language mod-
els with few-shot learning via retrieval-augmented generation,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.19619, 2024.
[675] Z. Tang, M. Agarwal, A. Shypula, B. Wang, D. Wijaya, J. Chen,
and Y. Kim, “Explain-then-translate: an analysis on improving
program translation with self-generated explanations,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2311.07070, 2023.
[676] M. Macedo, Y. Tian, F. Cogo, and B. Adams, “Exploring the
impact of the output format on the evaluation of large language
models for code translation,” in Proceedings of the 2024 IEEE/ACM
First International Conference on AI Foundation Models and Software
Engineering, 2024, pp. 57–68.
[677] M. T. Dearing, Y. Tao, X. Wu, Z. Lan, and V . Taylor, “Lassi: An llm-
based automated self-correcting pipeline for translating parallel
scientific codes,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.01638, 2024.
[678] R. Baltaji, S. Pujar, L. Mandel, M. Hirzel, L. Buratti, and L. Varsh-
ney, “Learning transfers over several programming languages,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.16937, 2023.
[679] Y. Huang, M. Qi, Y. Yao, M. Wang, B. Gu, C. Clement, and
N. Sundaresan, “Program translation via code distillation,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2310.11476, 2023.
[680] X. Yin, C. Ni, T. N. Nguyen, S. Wang, and X. Yang, “Recti-
fier: Code translation with corrector via llms,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.07472, 2024.
[681] V . Nitin and B. Ray, “Spectra: Enhancing the code translation
ability of language models by generating multi-modal specifica-
tions,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.18574, 2024.
[682] J. Pan, A. Sad ´e, J. Kim, E. Soriano, G. Sole, and S. Flamant,
“Stelocoder: a decoder-only llm for multi-language to python
code translation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.15539, 2023.
[683] M. Qi, Y. Huang, M. Wang, Y. Yao, Z. Liu, B. Gu, C. Clement, and
N. Sundaresan, “Sut: Active defects probing for transcompiler
models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.14209, 2023.
[684] H. F. Eniser, H. Zhang, C. David, M. Wang, B. Paulsen,
J. Dodds, and D. Kroening, “Towards translating real-world
code with llms: A study of translating to rust,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2405.11514, 2024.
[685] R. Pan, A. Ibrahimzada, R. Krishna, D. Sankar, L. Wassi, M. Mer-
ler, B. Sobolev, R. Pavuluri, S. Sinha, and R. Jabbarvand, “Un-
derstanding the effectiveness of large language models in code
translation. preprint (2023),” arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.03109.
[686] A. Z. Yang, Y. Takashima, B. Paulsen, J. Dodds, and D. Kroening,
“Vert: Verified equivalent rust transpilation with few-shot learn-
ing,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.18852, 2024.
[687] X. Li, S. Yuan, X. Gu, Y. Chen, and B. Shen, “Few-shot code
translation via task-adapted prompt learning,” Journal of Systems
and Software, vol. 212, p. 112002, 2024.
[688] M. Zhu, K. Suresh, and C. K. Reddy, “Multilingual code snippets
training for program translation,” in Proceedings of the AAAI
conference on artificial intelligence, vol. 36, no. 10, 2022, pp. 11 783–
11 790.
[689] B. Paranjape, S. Lundberg, S. Singh, H. Hajishirzi, L. Zettlemoyer,
and M. T. Ribeiro, “Art: Automatic multi-step reasoning and tool-
use for large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.09014 ,
2023.
[690] Y. Ding, J. Peng, M. J. Min, G. Kaiser, J. Yang, and B. Ray,
“Semcoder: Training code language models with comprehensive
semantics,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.01006, 2024.
[691] W. Ma, S. Liu, W. Wang, Q. Hu, Y. Liu, C. Zhang, L. Nie, and
Y. Liu, “The scope of chatgpt in software engineering: A thorough
investigation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.12138, 2023.
[692] F. Artuso, M. Mormando, G. A. Di Luna, and L. Querzoni,
“Binbert: Binary code understanding with a fine-tunable and
execution-aware transformer,” IEEE Transactions on Dependable
and Secure Computing, 2024.
[693] S. Utpala, A. Gu, and P . Y. Chen, “Language agnostic code
embeddings,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.16803, 2023.
[694] H. Pei, J. Zhao, L. Lausen, S. Zha, and G. Karypis, “Better context
makes better code language models: A case study on function
call argument completion,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 37, no. 4, 2023, pp. 5230–5238.
[695] J. Shi, S. Jiang, B. Xu, J. Liang, Y. Xiao, and W. Wang, “Shellgpt:
Generative pre-trained transformer model for shell language
understanding,” in 2023 IEEE 34th International Symposium on
Software Reliability Engineering (ISSRE). IEEE, 2023, pp. 671–682.
[696] I. Abdelaziz, J. Dolby, J. McCusker, and K. Srinivas, “Can ma-
chines read coding manuals yet?–a benchmark for building better
language models for code understanding,” in Proceedings of the
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 36, no. 4, 2022, pp.
4415–4423.
[697] D. Nam, A. Macvean, V . Hellendoorn, B. Vasilescu, and B. My-
ers, “In-ide generation-based information support with a large
language model,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.08177, 2023.
[698] N. Tao, A. Ventresque, V . Nallur, and T. Saber, “Enhancing
program synthesis with large language models using many-
objective grammar-guided genetic programming,” Algorithms,
vol. 17, no. 7, p. 287, 2024.
[699] A. Singla, “Evaluating chatgpt and gpt-4 for visual program-
ming,” in Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Conference on International
Computing Education Research-Volume 2, 2023, pp. 14–15.
[700] A. Shirafuji, Y. Watanobe, T. Ito, M. Morishita, Y. Nakamura,
Y. Oda, and J. Suzuki, “Exploring the robustness of large lan-
guage models for solving programming problems,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:2306.14583, 2023.
[701] P . Hajali and I. Budvytis, “Function-constrained program synthe-
sis,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.15500, 2023.
[702] J. Ye, C. Li, L. Kong, and T. Yu, “Generating data for symbolic
language with large language models,” in Proceedings of the 2023

--- PDF PAGE 47 ---
47
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,
2023, pp. 8418–8443.
[703] Y. Li, J. Parsert, and E. Polgreen, “Guiding enumerative program
synthesis with large language models,” in International Conference
on Computer Aided Verification. Springer, 2024, pp. 280–301.
[704] S. Barke, E. A. Gonzalez, S. R. Kasibatla, T. Berg-Kirkpatrick,
and N. Polikarpova, “Hysynth: Context-free llm approximation
for guiding program synthesis,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.15880 ,
2024.
[705] K. Kuznia, S. Mishra, M. Parmar, and C. Baral, “Less is more:
Summary of long instructions is better for program synthesis,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.08597, 2022.
[706] A. Gandhi, T. Q. Nguyen, H. Jiao, R. Steen, and A. Bhatawdekar,
“Natural language commanding via program synthesis,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2306.03460, 2023.
[707] J. Austin, A. Odena, M. Nye, M. Bosma, H. Michalewski, D. Do-
han, E. Jiang, C. Cai, M. Terry, Q. Le et al. , “Program synthesis
with large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07732 ,
2021.
[708] S. Yang, X. Chen, K. Liu, G. Yang, and C. Yu, “Automatic bi-
modal question title generation for stack overflow with prompt
learning,” Empirical Software Engineering, vol. 29, no. 3, p. 63, 2024.
[709] S. Rahmani, A. Naghshzan, and L. Guerrouj, “Improving code
example recommendations on informal documentation using
bert and query-aware lsh: A comparative study,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.03017, 2023.
[710] X. Zong, S. Zheng, H. Zou, H. Yu, and S. Gao, “Graphpyrec:
A novel graph-based approach for fine-grained python code
recommendation,” Science of Computer Programming , p. 103166,
2024.
[711] Q. Huang, Z. Zou, Z. Xing, Z. Zuo, X. Xu, and Q. Lu, “Ai
chain on large language model for unsupervised control flow
graph generation for statically-typed partial code,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2306.00757, 2023.
[712] L. Cheng, X. Li, and L. Bing, “Is gpt-4 a good data analyst?” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2305.15038, 2023.
[713] J. Zhu, L. Li, L. Yang, X. Ma, and C. Zuo, “Automating method
naming with context-aware prompt-tuning,” in 2023 IEEE/ACM
31st International Conference on Program Comprehension (ICPC) .
IEEE, 2023, pp. 203–214.
[714] M. Schroder, “Autoscrum: Automating project planning using
large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03197, 2023.
[715] S. Kabir, D. N. Udo-Imeh, B. Kou, and T. Zhang, “Is stack
overflow obsolete? an empirical study of the characteristics of
chatgpt answers to stack overflow questions,” in Proceedings of
the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 2024,
pp. 1–17.
[716] E. Firouzi and M. Ghafari, “Time to separate from stackoverflow
and match with chatgpt for encryption,” Journal of Systems and
Software, p. 112135, 2024.
[717] A. Abdellatif, K. Badran, D. E. Costa, and E. Shihab, “A
transformer-based approach for augmenting software engineer-
ing chatbots datasets,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.11955, 2024.
[718] K. Pei, D. Bieber, K. Shi, C. Sutton, and P . Yin, “Can large lan-
guage models reason about program invariants?” in International
Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2023, pp. 27 496–27 520.
[719] J. Yoon, R. Feldt, and S. Yoo, “Autonomous large language model
agents enabling intent-driven mobile gui testing,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.08649, 2023.
[720] L. Zhang, S. Lu, and N. Duan, “Selene: Pioneering automated
proof in software verification,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.07663 ,
2024.
[721] B. Cheng, C. Zhang, K. Wang, L. Shi, Y. Liu, H. Wang, Y. Guo, and
X. Chen, “Semantic-enhanced indirect call analysis with large
language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.04344, 2024.
[722] C. Wang, J. Liu, X. Peng, Y. Liu, and Y. Lou, “Boosting static
resource leak detection via llm-based resource-oriented intention
inference,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.04448, 2023.
[723] K. Jain, U. Alon, A. Groce, and C. Le Goues, “Contextual pre-
dictive mutation testing,” in Proceedings of the 31st ACM Joint
European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the
Foundations of Software Engineering, 2023, pp. 250–261.
[724] C. Richter and H. Wehrheim, “Learning realistic mutations: Bug
creation for neural bug detectors,” in 2022 IEEE Conference on
Software Testing, Verification and Validation (ICST) . IEEE, 2022,
pp. 162–173.
[725] M. Hassan, S. Ahmadi-Pour, K. Qayyum, C. K. Jha, and R. Drech-
sler, “Llm-guided formal verification coupled with mutation
testing,” in 2024 Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference
& Exhibition (DATE). IEEE, 2024, pp. 1–2.
[726] F. Tip, J. Bell, and M. Sch ¨afer, “Llmorpheus: Mutation testing
using large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.09952 ,
2024.
[727] Z. Li and D. Shin, “Mutation-based consistency testing for eval-
uating the code understanding capability of llms,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE/ACM 3rd International Conference on AI Engineering-
Software Engineering for AI, 2024, pp. 150–159.
[728] R. Degiovanni and M. Papadakis, “ µbert: Mutation testing using
pre-trained language models,” in 2022 IEEE International Con-
ference on Software Testing, Verification and Validation Workshops
(ICSTW). IEEE, 2022, pp. 160–169.
[729] P . Liu, C. Sun, Y. Zheng, X. Feng, C. Qin, Y. Wang, Z. Li, and
L. Sun, “Harnessing the power of llm to support binary taint
analysis,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08275, 2023.
[730] B. Steenhoek, M. M. Rahman, M. K. Roy, M. S. Alam, E. T.
Barr, and W. Le, “A comprehensive study of the capabilities of
large language models for vulnerability detection,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.17218, 2024.
[731] M. M. Kholoosi, M. A. Babar, and R. Croft, “A qualitative study
on using chatgpt for software security: Perception vs. practical-
ity,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00435, 2024.
[732] B. Ju, J. Yang, T. Yu, T. Abdullayev, Y. Wu, D. Wang, and Y. Zhao,
“A study of using multimodal llms for non-crash functional bug
detection in android apps,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.19053, 2024.
[733] M. Saad, J. A. H. L ´opez, B. Chen, D. Varr ´o, and T. Sharma,
“Alpine: An adaptive language-agnostic pruning method for
language models for code,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.04147, 2024.
[734] E. Pelofske, V . Urias, and L. M. Liebrock, “Automated software
vulnerability static code analysis using generative pre-trained
transformer models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00197, 2024.
[735] L. Gomes, R. da Silva Torres, and M. L. C ˆortes, “Bert-and tf-idf-
based feature extraction for long-lived bug prediction in floss: a
comparative study,” Information and Software Technology, vol. 160,
p. 107217, 2023.
[736] Y. Chen, C. Gao, Z. Yang, H. Zhang, and Q. Liao, “Bridge
and hint: Extending pre-trained language models for long-range
code,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.11233, 2024.
[737] S. Wan, J. Saxe, C. Gomes, S. Chennabasappa, A. Rath, K. Sun,
and X. Wang, “Bridging the gap: A study of ai-based vulnerabil-
ity management between industry and academia,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2405.02435, 2024.
[738] H. Lee, S. Sharma, and B. Hu, “Bug in the code stack: Can
llms find bugs in large python code stacks,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.15325, 2024.
[739] S. Ullah, M. Han, S. Pujar, H. Pearce, A. Coskun, and G. Stringh-
ini, “Can large language models identify and reason about se-
curity vulnerabilities? not yet,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.12575 ,
2023.
[740] Y. Nong, M. Aldeen, L. Cheng, H. Hu, F. Chen, and H. Cai,
“Chain-of-thought prompting of large language models for
discovering and fixing software vulnerabilities,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.17230, 2024.
[741] Z. Wang, G. Li, J. Li, Y. Dong, Y. Xiong, and Z. Jin, “Code
structure-aware through line-level semantic learning for code
vulnerability detection,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.18877, 2024.
[742] Y. Zhao, L. Gong, Z. Huang, Y. Wang, M. Wei, and F. Wu,
“Coding-ptms: How to find optimal code pre-trained models
for code embedding in vulnerability detection?” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2408.04863, 2024.
[743] X. Zhou, D.-M. Tran, T. Le-Cong, T. Zhang, I. C. Irsan, J. Sumarlin,
B. Le, and D. Lo, “Comparison of static application security test-
ing tools and large language models for repo-level vulnerability
detection,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.16235, 2024.
[744] W. Tang, M. Tang, M. Ban, Z. Zhao, and M. Feng, “Csgvd: A deep
learning approach combining sequence and graph embedding
for source code vulnerability detection,” Journal of Systems and
Software, vol. 199, p. 111623, 2023.
[745] B. Steenhoek, H. Gao, and W. Le, “Dataflow analysis-inspired
deep learning for efficient vulnerability detection,” in Proceedings
of the 46th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineer-
ing, 2024, pp. 1–13.

--- PDF PAGE 48 ---
48
[746] T. Koide, N. Fukushi, H. Nakano, and D. Chiba, “Detecting
phishing sites using chatgpt,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.05816 ,
2023.
[747] T. Sun, K. Allix, K. Kim, X. Zhou, D. Kim, D. Lo, T. F. Bissyand ´e,
and J. Klein, “Dexbert: Effective, task-agnostic and fine-grained
representation learning of android bytecode,” IEEE Transactions
on Software Engineering, 2023.
[748] Y. Chen, Z. Ding, L. Alowain, X. Chen, and D. Wagner, “Diver-
sevul: A new vulnerable source code dataset for deep learning
based vulnerability detection,” in Proceedings of the 26th Interna-
tional Symposium on Research in Attacks, Intrusions and Defenses ,
2023, pp. 654–668.
[749] Y. Yang, X. Zhou, R. Mao, J. Xu, L. Yang, Y. Zhangm, H. Shen,
and H. Zhang, “Dlap: A deep learning augmented large lan-
guage model prompting framework for software vulnerability
detection,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.01202, 2024.
[750] S. Liu, D. Cao, J. Kim, T. Abraham, P . Montague, S. Camtepe,
J. Zhang, and Y. Xiang, “Eatvul: Chatgpt-based evasion attack
against software vulnerability detection.”
[751] B. Yuan, Y. Lu, Y. Fang, Y. Wu, D. Zou, Z. Li, Z. Li, and
H. Jin, “Enhancing deep learning-based vulnerability detection
by building behavior graph model,” in 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th
International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) . IEEE,
2023, pp. 2262–2274.
[752] K. Lucas, R. Gheyi, E. Soares, M. Ribeiro, and I. Machado,
“Evaluating large language models in detecting test smells,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.19261, 2024.
[753] S. S. Daneshvar, Y. Nong, X. Yang, S. Wang, and H. Cai, “Ex-
ploring rag-based vulnerability augmentation with llms,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2408.04125, 2024.
[754] A. Shestov, A. Cheshkov, R. Levichev, R. Mussabayev,
P . Zadorozhny, E. Maslov, C. Vadim, and E. Bulychev, “Fine-
tuning large language models for vulnerability detection,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2401.17010, 2024.
[755] B. Ahmad, B. Tan, R. Karri, and H. Pearce, “Flag: Finding
line anomalies (in code) with generative ai,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2306.12643, 2023.
[756] G. Lu, X. Ju, X. Chen, W. Pei, and Z. Cai, “Grace: Empowering
llm-based software vulnerability detection with graph structure
and in-context learning,” Journal of Systems and Software, vol. 212,
p. 112031, 2024.
[757] K. Tamberg and H. Bahsi, “Harnessing large language models for
software vulnerability detection: A comprehensive benchmark-
ing study,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.15614, 2024.
[758] A. A. Mahyari, “Harnessing the power of llms in source code
vulnerability detection,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.03489, 2024.
[759] Z. Gao, H. Wang, Y. Zhou, W. Zhu, and C. Zhang, “How far have
we gone in vulnerability detection using large language models,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.12420, 2023.
[760] X. Tang, Z. Chen, K. Kim, H. Tian, S. Ezzini, and J. Klein,
“Just-in-time security patch detection–llm at the rescue for data
augmentation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.01241, 2023.
[761] X. Zhou, S. Cao, X. Sun, and D. Lo, “Large language model
for vulnerability detection and repair: Literature review and
roadmap,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.02525, 2024.
[762] K. Dozono, T. E. Gasiba, and A. Stocco, “Large language models
for secure code assessment: A multi-language empirical study,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.06428, 2024.
[763] N. S. Mathews, Y. Brus, Y. Aafer, M. Nagappan, and S. McIntosh,
“Llbezpeky: Leveraging large language models for vulnerability
detection,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.01269, 2024.
[764] V . Ashiwal, S. Finster, and A. Dawoud, “Llm-based vulnerability
sourcing from unstructured data,” in 2024 IEEE European Sympo-
sium on Security and Privacy Workshops (EuroS&PW). IEEE, 2024,
pp. 634–641.
[765] Y. Cheng, L. K. Shar, T. Zhang, S. Yang, C. Dong, D. Lo,
S. Lv, Z. Shi, and L. Sun, “Llm-enhanced static analysis for
precise identification of vulnerable oss versions,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2408.07321, 2024.
[766] Y. Sun, D. Wu, Y. Xue, H. Liu, W. Ma, L. Zhang, M. Shi, and
Y. Liu, “Llm4vuln: A unified evaluation framework for decou-
pling and enhancing llms’ vulnerability reasoning,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:2401.16185, 2024.
[767] M. Alqarni and A. Azim, “Low level source code vulnerability
detection using advanced bert language model,” in Proceedings
of the Canadian Conference on Artificial Intelligence-Https://caiac.
pubpub. org/pub/gdhb8oq4 (may 27 2022), 2022.
[768] Z. Wang, G. Li, J. Li, Y. Xiong, and Z. Jin, “M2cvd: Multi-model
collaboration for code vulnerability detection,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.05940, 2024.
[769] Z. Mao, J. Li, M. Li, and K. Tei, “Multi-role consensus through
llms discussions for vulnerability detection,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.14274, 2024.
[770] X. Yin and C. Ni, “Multitask-based evaluation of open-source llm
on software vulnerability,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.02056, 2024.
[771] M.-F. Wong, S. Guo, C.-N. Hang, S.-W. Ho, and C.-W. Tan,
“Natural language generation and understanding of big code for
ai-assisted programming: A review,” Entropy, vol. 25, no. 6, p.
888, 2023.
[772] C. X. Do, N. T. Luu, and P . T. L. Nguyen, “Optimizing software
vulnerability detection using roberta and machine learning,”
Automated Software Engineering, vol. 31, no. 2, p. 40, 2024.
[773] X. Yin, “Pros and cons! evaluating chatgpt on software vulnera-
bility,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.03994, 2024.
[774] J. Gonc ¸alves, T. Dias, E. Maia, and I. Prac ¸a, “Scope: Evalu-
ating llms for software vulnerability detection,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.14372, 2024.
[775] J. Yu, P . Liang, Y. Fu, A. Tahir, M. Shahin, C. Wang, and Y. Cai,
“Security code review by llms: A deep dive into responses,”arXiv
preprint arXiv:2401.16310, 2024.
[776] A. Grishina, M. Hort, and L. Moonen, “The earlybird catches
the bug: On exploiting early layers of encoder models for more
efficient code classification,” in Proceedings of the 31st ACM Joint
European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the
Foundations of Software Engineering, 2023, pp. 895–907.
[777] Q. Mao, Z. Li, X. Hu, K. Liu, X. Xia, and J. Sun, “Towards
effectively detecting and explaining vulnerabilities using large
language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09701, 2024.
[778] C. Thapa, S. I. Jang, M. E. Ahmed, S. Camtepe, J. Pieprzyk, and
S. Nepal, “Transformer-based language models for software vul-
nerability detection,” in Proceedings of the 38th Annual Computer
Security Applications Conference, 2022, pp. 481–496.
[779] A. Chan, A. Kharkar, R. Z. Moghaddam, Y. Mohylevskyy, A. Hel-
yar, E. Kamal, M. Elkamhawy, and N. Sundaresan, “Transformer-
based vulnerability detection in code at edittime: Zero-shot, few-
shot, or fine-tuning?” arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.01754, 2023.
[780] A. Khare, S. Dutta, Z. Li, A. Solko-Breslin, R. Alur, and M. Naik,
“Understanding the effectiveness of large language models in de-
tecting security vulnerabilities,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.16169 ,
2023.
[781] S. M. Taghavi and F. Feyzi, “Using large language models to bet-
ter detect and handle software vulnerabilities and cyber security
threats,” 2024.
[782] X. Du, G. Zheng, K. Wang, J. Feng, W. Deng, M. Liu, B. Chen,
X. Peng, T. Ma, and Y. Lou, “Vul-rag: Enhancing llm-based
vulnerability detection via knowledge-level rag,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.11147, 2024.
[783] H. Hanif and S. Maffeis, “Vulberta: Simplified source code pre-
training for vulnerability detection,” in 2022 International joint
conference on neural networks (IJCNN). IEEE, 2022, pp. 1–8.
[784] A. H. A. Chukkol, S. Luo, K. Sharif, Y. Haruna, and M. M.
Abdullahi, “Vulcatch: Enhancing binary vulnerability detection
through codet5 decompilation and kan advanced feature extrac-
tion,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.07181, 2024.
[785] Y. Liu, L. Gao, M. Yang, Y. Xie, P . Chen, X. Zhang, and
W. Chen, “Vuldetectbench: Evaluating the deep capability of vul-
nerability detection with large language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.07595, 2024.
[786] X.-C. Wen, X. Wang, Y. Chen, R. Hu, D. Lo, and C. Gao, “Vuleval:
Towards repository-level evaluation of software vulnerability
detection,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.15596, 2024.
[787] V . Akuthota, R. Kasula, S. T. Sumona, M. Mohiuddin, M. T. Reza,
and M. M. Rahman, “Vulnerability detection and monitoring
using llm,” in 2023 IEEE 9th International Women in Engineering
(WIE) Conference on Electrical and Computer Engineering (WIECON-
ECE). IEEE, 2023, pp. 309–314.
[788] Y. Ding, Y. Fu, O. Ibrahim, C. Sitawarin, X. Chen, B. Alo-
mair, D. Wagner, B. Ray, and Y. Chen, “Vulnerability detection
with code language models: How far are we?” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.18624, 2024.
[789] V . L. A. Quan, C. T. Phat, K. Van Nguyen, P . T. Duy, and V .-
H. Pham, “Xgv-bert: Leveraging contextualized language model
and graph neural network for efficient software vulnerability
detection,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.14677, 2023.

--- PDF PAGE 49 ---
49
[790] H. Wu, Z. Zhang, S. Wang, Y. Lei, B. Lin, Y. Qin, H. Zhang,
and X. Mao, “Peculiar: Smart contract vulnerability detection
based on crucial data flow graph and pre-training techniques,”
in 2021 IEEE 32nd International Symposium on Software Reliability
Engineering (ISSRE). IEEE, 2021, pp. 378–389.
[791] Z. Jiang, W. Sun, X. Gu, J. Wu, T. Wen, H. Hu, and M. Yan,
“Dfept: Data flow embedding for enhancing pre-trained model
based vulnerability detection,” in Proceedings of the 15th Asia-
Pacific Symposium on Internetware, 2024, pp. 95–104.
[792] D. Pratama, N. Suryanto, A. A. Adiputra, T.-T.-H. Le, A. Y.
Kadiptya, M. Iqbal, and H. Kim, “Cipher: Cybersecurity intel-
ligent penetration-testing helper for ethical researcher,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2408.11650, 2024.
[793] J. Su, L. Deng, C. Wen, S. Qin, and C. Tian, “cfstra: Enhancing con-
figurable program analysis through llm-driven strategy selection
based on code features,” in International Symposium on Theoretical
Aspects of Software Engineering. Springer, 2024, pp. 374–391.
[794] S. Yan, S. Wang, Y. Duan, H. Hong, K. Lee, D. Kim, and Y. Hong,
“An llm-assisted easy-to-trigger backdoor attack on code com-
pletion models: Injecting disguised vulnerabilities against strong
detection,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.06822, 2024.
[795] Y. Xia, Z. Xie, P . Liu, K. Lu, Y. Liu, W. Wang, and S. Ji, “Exploring
automatic cryptographic api misuse detection in the era of llms,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.16576, 2024.
[796] F. He, J. Zhai, and M. Pan, “Beyond code generation: As-
sessing code llm maturity with postconditions,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.14118, 2024.
[797] H. Wang, H. Hu, C. Chen, and B. Turhan, “Chat-like asserts
prediction with the support of large language model,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2407.21429, 2024.
[798] B. Mali, K. Maddala, S. Reddy, V . Gupta, C. Karfa, and R. Karri,
“Chiraag: Chatgpt informed rapid and automated assertion gen-
eration,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.00093, 2024.
[799] Y. Feng, H. Li, Y. Cao, Y. Wang, and H. Feng, “Crabs-former:
Cross-architecture binary code similarity detection based on
transformer,” in Proceedings of the 15th Asia-Pacific Symposium on
Internetware, 2024, pp. 11–20.
[800] H. Wang, W. Qu, G. Katz, W. Zhu, Z. Gao, H. Qiu, J. Zhuge,
and C. Zhang, “Jtrans: Jump-aware transformer for binary code
similarity detection,” in Proceedings of the 31st ACM SIGSOFT
International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis, 2022, pp.
1–13.
[801] S. Ahn, S. Ahn, H. Koo, and Y. Paek, “Practical binary code simi-
larity detection with bert-based transferable similarity learning,”
in Proceedings of the 38th Annual Computer Security Applications
Conference, 2022, pp. 361–374.
[802] Z. Yu, R. Cao, Q. Tang, S. Nie, J. Huang, and S. Wu, “Order
matters: Semantic-aware neural networks for binary code simi-
larity detection,” in Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial
intelligence, vol. 34, no. 01, 2020, pp. 1145–1152.
[803] Y. Qin, S. Wang, Y. Lou, J. Dong, K. Wang, X. Li, and X. Mao,
“Agentfl: Scaling llm-based fault localization to project-level con-
text,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.16362, 2024.
[804] J. Yan, J. Huang, C. Fang, J. Yan, and J. Zhang, “Better debugging:
Combining static analysis and llms for explainable crashing fault
localization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.12070, 2024.
[805] A. M. Mohsen, H. Hassan, K. Wassif, R. Moawad, and S. Makady,
“Enhancing bug localization using phase-based approach,” IEEE
Access, 2023.
[806] S. Shan, Y. Huo, Y. Su, Y. Li, D. Li, and Z. Zheng, “Face it your-
selves: An llm-based two-stage strategy to localize configuration
errors via logs,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.00640, 2024.
[807] S. Ji, S. Lee, C. Lee, H. Im, and Y.-S. Han, “Impact of large
language models of code on fault localization,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2408.09657, 2024.
[808] S. Bin Murtaza, A. Mccoy, Z. Ren, A. Murphy, and W. Banzhaf,
“Llm fault localisation within evolutionary computation based
automated program repair,” in Proceedings of the Genetic and
Evolutionary Computation Conference Companion , 2024, pp. 1824–
1829.
[809] Y. Du and Z. Yu, “Pre-training code representation with seman-
tic flow graph for effective bug localization,” in Proceedings of
the 31st ACM Joint European Software Engineering Conference and
Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering , 2023, pp.
579–591.
[810] A. Ciborowska and K. Damevski, “Too few bug reports? ex-
ploring data augmentation for improved changeset-based bug
localization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16430, 2023.
[811] Y. Wu, Z. Li, J. M. Zhang, and Y. Liu, “Condefects: A complemen-
tary dataset to address the data leakage concern for llm-based
fault localization and program repair,” in Companion Proceedings
of the 32nd ACM International Conference on the Foundations of
Software Engineering, 2024, pp. 642–646.
[812] Y. Charalambous, N. Tihanyi, R. Jain, Y. Sun, M. A. Ferrag, and
L. C. Cordeiro, “A new era in software security: Towards self-
healing software via large language models and formal verifica-
tion,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14752, 2023.
[813] Y. Liu, Y. Xue, D. Wu, Y. Sun, Y. Li, M. Shi, and Y. Liu,
“Propertygpt: Llm-driven formal verification of smart contracts
through retrieval-augmented property generation,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:2405.02580, 2024.
[814] N. Tihanyi, T. Bisztray, R. Jain, M. A. Ferrag, L. C. Cordeiro, and
V . Mavroeidis, “The formai dataset: Generative ai in software
security through the lens of formal verification,” in Proceedings
of the 19th International Conference on Predictive Models and Data
Analytics in Software Engineering, 2023, pp. 33–43.
[815] C. Wen, J. Cao, J. Su, Z. Xu, S. Qin, M. He, H. Li, S.-C. Cheung,
and C. Tian, “Enchanting program specification synthesis by
large language models using static analysis and program verifi-
cation,” in International Conference on Computer Aided Verification .
Springer, 2024, pp. 302–328.
[816] P . J. Chapman, C. Rubio-Gonz ´alez, and A. V . Thakur, “Interleav-
ing static analysis and llm prompting,” in Proceedings of the 13th
ACM SIGPLAN International Workshop on the State Of the Art in
Program Analysis, 2024, pp. 9–17.
[817] C. Fang, N. Miao, S. Srivastav, J. Liu, R. Zhang, R. Fang, R. Tsang,
N. Nazari, H. Wang, H. Homayounet al., “Large language models
for code analysis: Do {LLMs} really do their job?” in 33rd
USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 24), 2024, pp. 829–
846.
[818] C. Wen, Y. Cai, B. Zhang, J. Su, Z. Xu, D. Liu, S. Qin, Z. Ming,
and T. Cong, “Automatically inspecting thousands of static bug
warnings with large language model: How far are we?” ACM
Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data , vol. 18, no. 7, pp.
1–34, 2024.
[819] A. Lops, F. Narducci, A. Ragone, M. Trizio, and C. Bartolini, “A
system for automated unit test generation using large language
models and assessment of generated test suites,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2408.07846, 2024.
[820] X. Yuan, J. Li, D. Wang, Y. Chen, X. Mao, L. Huang, H. Xue,
W. Wang, K. Ren, and J. Wang, “S-eval: Automatic and adap-
tive test generation for benchmarking safety evaluation of large
language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14191, 2024.
[821] K. Zhang, D. Wang, J. Xia, W. Y. Wang, and L. Li, “Algo: Syn-
thesizing algorithmic programs with generated oracle verifiers,”
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 36, pp.
54 769–54 784, 2023.
[822] M. Sch ¨afer, S. Nadi, A. Eghbali, and F. Tip, “An empirical eval-
uation of using large language models for automated unit test
generation,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 2023.
[823] Z. Zhou, Y. Tang, Y. Lin, and J. He, “An llm-based readability
measurement for unit tests’ context-aware inputs,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.21369, 2024.
[824] L. Plein, W. C. Ou ´edraogo, J. Klein, and T. F. Bissyand ´e, “Auto-
matic generation of test cases based on bug reports: a feasibility
study with large language models,” in Proceedings of the 2024
IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on Software Engineering:
Companion Proceedings, 2024, pp. 360–361.
[825] H. Kirinuki and H. Tanno, “Chatgpt and human synergy
in black-box testing: A comparative analysis,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2401.13924, 2024.
[826] A. Azaria, R. Azoulay, and S. Reches, “Chatgpt is a remarkable
tool—for experts,” Data Intelligence , vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 240–296,
2024.
[827] N. M ¨undler, M. N. M¨uller, J. He, and M. Vechev, “Code agents are
state of the art software testers,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.12952,
2024.
[828] M. Li, D. Li, J. Liu, J. Cao, Y. Tian, and S.-C. Cheung, “Dllens:
Testing deep learning libraries via llm-aided synthesis,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2406.07944, 2024.
[829] J. Shin, S. Hashtroudi, H. Hemmati, and S. Wang, “Domain
adaptation for deep unit test case generation,” arXiv e-prints, pp.
arXiv–2308, 2023.

--- PDF PAGE 50 ---
50
[830] C. Yang, J. Chen, B. Lin, J. Zhou, and Z. Wang, “Enhancing llm-
based test generation for hard-to-cover branches via program
analysis,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.04966, 2024.
[831] Y. He, J. Wang, Y. Rong, and H. Chen, “Exploring fuzzing as
data augmentation for neural test generation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.08665, 2024.
[832] M. L. Siddiq, J. Santos, R. H. Tanvir, N. Ulfat, F. Rifat, and V . C.
Lopes, “Exploring the effectiveness of large language models in
generating unit tests,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.00418, 2023.
[833] C. Arora, T. Herda, and V . Homm, “Generating test scenarios
from nl requirements using retrieval-augmented llms: An indus-
trial study,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.12772, 2024.
[834] R. Karanjai, A. Hussain, M. R. I. Rabin, L. Xu, W. Shi, and
M. A. Alipour, “Harnessing the power of llms: Automating unit
test generation for high-performance computing,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.05202, 2024.
[835] K. Li and Y. Yuan, “Large language models as test case gener-
ators: Performance evaluation and enhancement,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.13340, 2024.
[836] T. Li, C. Cui, L. Ma, D. Towey, Y. Xie, and R. Huang, “Leveraging
large language models for automated web-form-test generation:
An empirical study,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.09965, 2024.
[837] K. Etemadi, B. Mohammadi, Z. Su, and M. Monperrus, “Mokav:
Execution-driven differential testing with llms,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.10375, 2024.
[838] Z. Yuan, Y. Lou, M. Liu, S. Ding, K. Wang, Y. Chen, and X. Peng,
“No more manual tests? evaluating and improving chatgpt for
unit test generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.04207, 2023.
[839] B. Steenhoek, M. Tufano, N. Sundaresan, and A. Svyatkovskiy,
“Reinforcement learning from automatic feedback for high-
quality unit test generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.02368 ,
2023.
[840] M. Nabeel, D. D. Nimara, and T. Zanouda, “Test code generation
for telecom software systems using two-stage generative model,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.09249, 2024.
[841] W. Xiong, Y. Guo, and H. Chen, “The program testing ability of
large language models for code,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.05727,
2023.
[842] M. Tufano, D. Drain, A. Svyatkovskiy, S. K. Deng, and N. Sun-
daresan, “Unit test case generation with transformers and focal
context,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.05617, 2020.
[843] Q. Motger, A. Miaschi, F. Dell’Orletta, X. Franch, and J. Marco, “T-
frex: A transformer-based feature extraction method from mobile
app reviews,” in 2024 IEEE International Conference on Software
Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering (SANER) . IEEE, 2024, pp.
227–238.
[844] Y. Wang, J. Wang, H. Zhang, X. Ming, L. Shi, and Q. Wang,
“Where is your app frustrating users?” in Proceedings of the 44th
International Conference on Software Engineering , 2022, pp. 2427–
2439.
[845] H. Isotani, H. Washizaki, Y. Fukazawa, T. Nomoto, S. Ouji,
and S. Saito, “Duplicate bug report detection by using sentence
embedding and fine-tuning,” in 2021 IEEE international conference
on software maintenance and evolution (ICSME) . IEEE, 2021, pp.
535–544.
[846] X. Wu, H. Li, N. Yoshioka, H. Washizaki, and F. Khomh, “Refining
gpt-3 embeddings with a siamese structure for technical post
duplicate detection,” in 2024 IEEE International Conference on
Software Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering (SANER) . IEEE,
2024, pp. 114–125.
[847] R. K. Helmeczi, M. Cevik, and S. Yıldırım, “Few-shot learning
for sentence pair classification and its applications in software
engineering,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.08058, 2023.
[848] R. Sharma, F. Chen, F. Fard, and D. Lo, “An exploratory study
on code attention in bert,” in Proceedings of the 30th IEEE/ACM
International Conference on Program Comprehension , 2022, pp. 437–
448.
[849] A. I. Alam, P . R. Roy, F. Al-Omari, C. K. Roy, B. Roy, and
K. A. Schneider, “Gptclonebench: A comprehensive benchmark
of semantic clones and cross-language clones using gpt-3 model
and semanticclonebench,” in 2023 IEEE International Conference
on Software Maintenance and Evolution (ICSME) . IEEE, 2023, pp.
1–13.
[850] N. T. Islam, J. Khoury, A. Seong, G. D. L. T. Parra, E. Bou-
Harb, and P . Najafirad, “Llm-powered code vulnerability repair
with reinforcement learning and semantic reward,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:2401.03374, 2024.
[851] M. Chochlov, G. A. Ahmed, J. V . Patten, G. Lu, W. Hou, D. Gregg,
and J. Buckley, “Using a nearest-neighbour, bert-based approach
for scalable clone detection,” in 2022 IEEE International Conference
on Software Maintenance and Evolution (ICSME) . IEEE, 2022, pp.
582–591.
[852] I. Saberi, F. Fard, and F. Chen, “Utilization of pre-trained lan-
guage models for adapter-based knowledge transfer in software
engineering,” Empirical Software Engineering, vol. 29, no. 4, p. 94,
2024.
[853] Y. Du, T. Ma, L. Wu, X. Zhang, and S. Ji, “Adaccd: Adaptive
semantic contrasts discovery based cross lingual adaptation for
code clone detection,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, vol. 38, no. 16, 2024, pp. 17 942–17 950.
[854] S. Kang, J. Yoon, N. Askarbekkyzy, and S. Yoo, “Evaluating
diverse large language models for automatic and general bug
reproduction,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.04532, 2023.
[855] M. Tufano, S. Chandel, A. Agarwal, N. Sundaresan, and
C. Clement, “Predicting code coverage without execution,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2307.13383, 2023.
[856] G. Colavito, F. Lanubile, N. Novielli, and L. Quaranta, “Impact of
data quality for automatic issue classification using pre-trained
language models,” Journal of Systems and Software , vol. 210, p.
111838, 2024.
[857] J. Lu, Z. Tang, and Z. Liu, “Improving code refinement for code
review via input reconstruction and ensemble learning,” in 2023
30th Asia-Pacific Software Engineering Conference (APSEC) . IEEE,
2023, pp. 161–170.
[858] L. Dong-Kyu, “A gpt-based code review system for program-
ming language learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.04722, 2024.
[859] O. B. Sghaier and H. Sahraoui, “A multi-step learning approach
to assist code review,” in 2023 IEEE International Conference on
Software Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering (SANER) . IEEE,
2023, pp. 450–460.
[860] M. Vijayvergiya, M. Salawa, I. Budiseli ´c, D. Zheng, P . Lamblin,
M. Ivankovi ´c, J. Carin, M. Lewko, J. Andonov, G. Petrovi ´c et al.,
“Ai-assisted assessment of coding practices in modern code
review,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.13565, 2024.
[861] Z. Rasheed, M. A. Sami, M. Waseem, K.-K. Kemell, X. Wang,
A. Nguyen, K. Syst ¨a, and P . Abrahamsson, “Ai-powered code
review with llms: Early results,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.18496 ,
2024.
[862] C. Yang, B. Xu, J. Y. Khan, G. Uddin, D. Han, Z. Yang, and D. Lo,
“Aspect-based api review classification: How far can pre-trained
transformer model go?” in 2022 IEEE International Conference on
Software Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering (SANER) . IEEE,
2022, pp. 385–395.
[863] L. Ghadhab, I. Jenhani, M. W. Mkaouer, and M. B. Messaoud,
“Augmenting commit classification by using fine-grained source
code changes and a pre-trained deep neural language model,”
Information and Software Technology, vol. 135, p. 106566, 2021.
[864] B. Kou, M. Chen, and T. Zhang, “Automated summarization
of stack overflow posts,” in 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 2023, pp. 1853–
1865.
[865] Y. Yin, Y. Zhao, Y. Sun, and C. Chen, “Automatic code review
by learning the structure information of code graph,” Sensors,
vol. 23, no. 5, p. 2551, 2023.
[866] T. Ahmed, P . Devanbu, C. Treude, and M. Pradel, “Can llms
replace manual annotation of software engineering artifacts?”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.05534, 2024.
[867] C. Koutcheme, N. Dainese, A. Hellas, S. Sarsa, J. Leinonen,
S. Ashraf, and P . Denny, “Evaluating language models for
generating and judging programming feedback,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.04873, 2024.
[868] L. Fan, J. Liu, Z. Liu, D. Lo, X. Xia, and S. Li, “Exploring the
capabilities of llms for code change related tasks,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.02824, 2024.
[869] C. Pornprasit and C. Tantithamthavorn, “Fine-tuning and prompt
engineering for large language models-based code review au-
tomation,” Information and Software Technology, vol. 175, p. 107523,
2024.
[870] O. Ben Sghaier and H. Sahraoui, “Improving the learning of code
review successive tasks with cross-task knowledge distillation,”
Proceedings of the ACM on Software Engineering, vol. 1, no. FSE, pp.
1086–1106, 2024.
[871] I. Ferreira, A. Rafiq, and J. Cheng, “Incivility detection in open

--- PDF PAGE 51 ---
51
source code review and issue discussions,” Journal of Systems and
Software, vol. 209, p. 111935, 2024.
[872] J. Lu, L. Yu, X. Li, L. Yang, and C. Zuo, “Llama-reviewer: Advanc-
ing code review automation with large language models through
parameter-efficient fine-tuning,” in 2023 IEEE 34th International
Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering (ISSRE). IEEE, 2023,
pp. 647–658.
[873] N. McAleese, R. M. Pokorny, J. F. C. Uribe, E. Nitishinskaya,
M. Trebacz, and J. Leike, “Llm critics help catch llm bugs,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2407.00215, 2024.
[874] Z. Zhao, Z. Xu, J. Zhu, P . Di, Y. Yao, and X. Ma, “The right
prompts for the job: Repair code-review defects with large lan-
guage model,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.17485, 2023.
[875] D. Pomian, A. Bellur, M. Dilhara, Z. Kurbatova, E. Bogomolov,
T. Bryksin, and D. Dig, “Next-generation refactoring: Combining
llm insights and ide capabilities for extract method.”
[876] A. Shirafuji, Y. Oda, J. Suzuki, M. Morishita, and Y. Watanobe,
“Refactoring programs using large language models with few-
shot examples,” in 2023 30th Asia-Pacific Software Engineering
Conference (APSEC). IEEE, 2023, pp. 151–160.
[877] Z. Zhang, Z. Xing, X. Ren, Q. Lu, and X. Xu, “Refactoring to
pythonic idioms: A hybrid knowledge-driven approach leverag-
ing large language models,” Proceedings of the ACM on Software
Engineering, vol. 1, no. FSE, pp. 1107–1128, 2024.
[878] H. Liu, Y. Wang, Z. Wei, Y. Xu, J. Wang, H. Li, and R. Ji, “Refbert:
A two-stage pre-trained framework for automatic rename refac-
toring,” in Proceedings of the 32nd ACM SIGSOFT International
Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis, 2023, pp. 740–752.
[879] Y. Zhang, Z. Qiu, K.-J. Stol, W. Zhu, J. Zhu, Y. Tian, and H. Liu,
“Automatic commit message generation: A critical review and
directions for future work,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engi-
neering, 2024.
[880] T. Ye, T. Ma, L. Wu, X. Zhang, S. Ji, and W. Wang, “Iterative or in-
novative? a problem-oriented perspective for code optimization,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.11935, 2024.
[881] C. Cummins, V . Seeker, D. Grubisic, M. Elhoushi, Y. Liang,
B. Roziere, J. Gehring, F. Gloeckle, K. Hazelwood, G. Synnaeve
et al., “Large language models for compiler optimization,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2309.07062, 2023.
[882] A. Shypula, A. Madaan, Y. Zeng, U. Alon, J. Gardner,
M. Hashemi, G. Neubig, P . Ranganathan, O. Bastani, and A. Yaz-
danbakhsh, “Learning performance-improving code edits,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2302.07867, 2023.
[883] C. Cummins, V . Seeker, D. Grubisic, B. Roziere, J. Gehring,
G. Synnaeve, and H. Leather, “Meta large language model
compiler: Foundation models of compiler optimization,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2407.02524, 2024.
[884] D. Grubisic, V . Seeker, G. Synnaeve, H. Leather, J. Mellor-
Crummey, and C. Cummins, “Priority sampling of large lan-
guage models for compilers,” in Proceedings of the 4th Workshop
on Machine Learning and Systems, 2024, pp. 91–97.
[885] M. Romero Rosas, M. Torres Sanchez, and R. Eigenmann,
“Should ai optimize your code? a comparative study of current
large language models versus classical optimizing compilers,”
arXiv e-prints, pp. arXiv–2406, 2024.
[886] S. Kang, B. Chen, S. Yoo, and J.-G. Lou, “Explainable automated
debugging via large language model-driven scientific debug-
ging,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.02195, 2023.
[887] S. Fatima, T. A. Ghaleb, and L. Briand, “Flakify: A black-box, lan-
guage model-based predictor for flaky tests,” IEEE Transactions
on Software Engineering, vol. 49, no. 4, pp. 1912–1927, 2022.
[888] Y. Li, Y. Huo, Z. Jiang, R. Zhong, P . He, Y. Su, and M. R.
Lyu, “Exploring the effectiveness of llms in automated logging
generation: An empirical study,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.05950,
2023.
[889] L. Ma, W. Yang, B. Xu, S. Jiang, B. Fei, J. Liang, M. Zhou,
and Y. Xiao, “Knowlog: Knowledge enhanced pre-trained lan-
guage model for log understanding,” in Proceedings of the 46th
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering , 2024,
pp. 1–13.
[890] S. Yu, Y. Wu, Z. Li, P . He, N. Chen, and C. Liu, “Log parsing
with generalization ability under new log types,” in Proceedings
of the 31st ACM Joint European Software Engineering Conference and
Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering , 2023, pp.
425–437.
[891] Y. Wu, S. Yu, and Y. Li, “Log parsing with self-
generated in-context learning and self-correction,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.03376, 2024.
[892] A. Mastropaolo, L. Pascarella, and G. Bavota, “Using deep learn-
ing to generate complete log statements,” inProceedings of the 44th
International Conference on Software Engineering , 2022, pp. 2279–
2290.
[893] A. Mastropaolo, V . Ferrari, L. Pascarella, and G. Bavota, “Log
statements generation via deep learning: Widening the support
provided to developers,” Journal of Systems and Software, vol. 210,
p. 111947, 2024.
[894] Z. Liu, C. Chen, J. Wang, M. Chen, B. Wu, Z. Tian, Y. Huang, J. Hu,
and Q. Wang, “Testing the limits: Unusual text inputs generation
for mobile app crash detection with large language model,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on
Software Engineering, 2024, pp. 1–12.
[895] S. He, Y. Lei, Y. Zhang, K. Xie, and P . K. Sharma, “Parameter-
efficient log anomaly detection based on pre-training model
and lora,” in 2023 IEEE 34th International Symposium on Software
Reliability Engineering (ISSRE). IEEE, 2023, pp. 207–217.
[896] P . Jin, S. Zhang, M. Ma, H. Li, Y. Kang, L. Li, Y. Liu, B. Qiao,
C. Zhang, P . Zhaoet al., “Assess and summarize: Improve outage
understanding with large language models,” in Proceedings of
the 31st ACM Joint European Software Engineering Conference and
Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering , 2023, pp.
1657–1668.
[897] E. Biswas, M. E. Karabulut, L. Pollock, and K. Vijay-Shanker,
“Achieving reliable sentiment analysis in the software engineer-
ing domain using bert,” in 2020 IEEE International conference on
software maintenance and evolution (ICSME). IEEE, 2020, pp. 162–
173.
[898] M. Shafikuzzaman, M. R. Islam, A. C. Rolli, S. Akhter, and
N. Seliya, “An empirical evaluation of the zero-shot, few-shot,
and traditional fine-tuning based pretrained language models for
sentiment analysis in software engineering,” IEEE Access, 2024.
[899] T. Zhang, I. C. Irsan, F. Thung, and D. Lo, “Revisiting sentiment
analysis for software engineering in the era of large language
models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.11113, 2023.
[900] T. Zhang, B. Xu, F. Thung, S. A. Haryono, D. Lo, and L. Jiang,
“Sentiment analysis for software engineering: How far can pre-
trained transformer models go?” in 2020 IEEE International Con-
ference on Software Maintenance and Evolution (ICSME) . IEEE,
2020, pp. 70–80.
[901] J. He, B. Xu, Z. Yang, D. Han, C. Yang, and D. Lo, “Ptm4tag:
sharpening tag recommendation of stack overflow posts with
pre-trained models,” in Proceedings of the 30th IEEE/ACM Inter-
national Conference on Program Comprehension, 2022, pp. 1–11.
[902] A. Mastropaolo, M. Di Penta, and G. Bavota, “Towards auto-
matically addressing self-admitted technical debt: How far are
we?” in 2023 38th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated
Software Engineering (ASE). IEEE, 2023, pp. 585–597.
[903] Q. Huang, J. Zhu, Z. Xing, H. Jin, C. Wang, and X. Xu, “A chain
of ai-based solutions for resolving fqns and fixing syntax errors
in partial code,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.11981, 2023.
[904] J. White, Q. Fu, S. Hays, M. Sandborn, C. Olea, H. Gilbert,
A. Elnashar, J. Spencer-Smith, and D. C. Schmidt, “A prompt
pattern catalog to enhance prompt engineering with chatgpt,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.11382, 2023.
[905] P . Widjojo and C. Treude, “Addressing compiler errors:
Stack overflow or large language models?” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.10793, 2023.
[906] M. Kim, Y. Kim, H. Jeong, J. Heo, S. Kim, H. Chung, and E. Lee,
“An empirical study of deep transfer learning-based program
repair for kotlin projects,” in Proceedings of the 30th ACM Joint
European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the
Foundations of Software Engineering, 2022, pp. 1441–1452.
[907] N. T. Islam and P . Najafirad, “Code security vulnerability repair
using reinforcement learning with large language models,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2401.07031, 2024.
[908] C. S. Xia and L. Zhang, “Conversational automated program
repair,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.13246, 2023.
[909] R. Paul, M. M. Hossain, M. L. Siddiq, M. Hasan, A. Iqbal, and
J. Santos, “Enhancing automated program repair through fine-
tuning and prompt engineering,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07840,
2023.
[910] P . Deligiannis, A. Lal, N. Mehrotra, and A. Rastogi, “Fixing rust
compilation errors using llms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.05177 ,
2023.

--- PDF PAGE 52 ---
52
[911] N. Wadhwa, J. Pradhan, A. Sonwane, S. P . Sahu, N. Natara-
jan, A. Kanade, S. Parthasarathy, and S. Rajamani, “Frus-
trated with code quality issues? llms can help!” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2309.12938, 2023.
[912] Z. Xu, Y. Lin, Q. Li, and S. H. Tan, “Guiding chatgpt to fix
web ui tests via explanation-consistency checking,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.05778, 2023.
[913] Z. Sun, H. Zhu, B. Xu, X. Du, L. Li, and D. Lo, “Llm as runtime
error handler: A promising pathway to adaptive self-healing of
software systems,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.01055, 2024.
[914] Y. Zhang, G. Li, Z. Jin, and Y. Xing, “Neural program repair with
program dependence analysis and effective filter mechanism,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.09315, 2023.
[915] Y. Liu, C. Tantithamthavorn, Y. Liu, and L. Li, “On the reliability
and explainability of language models for program generation,”
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, vol. 33,
no. 5, pp. 1–26, 2024.
[916] C. S. Xia, Y. Wei, and L. Zhang, “Practical program repair in
the era of large pre-trained language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2210.14179, 2022.
[917] Y. W. Chow, L. Di Grazia, and M. Pradel, “Pyty: Repairing static
type errors in python,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 46th
International Conference on Software Engineering, 2024, pp. 1–13.
[918] Y. Zhao, Z. Huang, Y. Ma, R. Li, K. Zhang, H. Jiang, Q. Liu,
L. Zhu, and Y. Su, “Repair: Automated program repair with
process-based feedback,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.11296, 2024.
[919] X. Du, M. Liu, J. Li, H. Wang, X. Peng, and Y. Lou, “Resolving
crash bugs via large language models: An empirical study,”arXiv
preprint arXiv:2312.10448, 2023.
[920] J. Henkel, D. Silva, L. Teixeira, M. d’Amorim, and T. Reps,
“Shipwright: A human-in-the-loop system for dockerfile repair,”
in 2021 IEEE/ACM 43rd International Conference on Software Engi-
neering (ICSE). IEEE, 2021, pp. 1148–1160.
[921] Y. Zhang, Z. Jin, Y. Xing, and G. Li, “Steam: simulating the
interactive behavior of programmers for automatic bug fixing,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.14460, 2023.
[922] C. S. Xia, Y. Ding, and L. Zhang, “Revisiting the plastic
surgery hypothesis via large language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.10494, 2023.
[923] M. Lajk ´o, V . Csuvik, and L. Vid´acs, “Towards javascript program
repair with generative pre-trained transformer (gpt-2),” in Pro-
ceedings of the Third International Workshop on Automated Program
Repair, 2022, pp. 61–68.
[924] J. Zhang, T. Mytkowicz, M. Kaufman, R. Piskac, and S. K. Lahiri,
“Using pre-trained language models to resolve textual and se-
mantic merge conflicts (experience paper),” in Proceedings of the
31st ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing
and Analysis, 2022, pp. 77–88.
[925] R. Gharibi, M. H. Sadreddini, and S. M. Fakhrahmad, “T5apr:
Empowering automated program repair across languages
through checkpoint ensemble,” Journal of Systems and Software ,
vol. 214, p. 112083, 2024.
[926] A. Ali, Y. Xia, Q. Umer, and M. Osman, “Bert based severity
prediction of bug reports for the maintenance of mobile applica-
tions,” Journal of Systems and Software, vol. 208, p. 111898, 2024.
[927] J. Acharya and G. Ginde, “Graph neural network vs. large
language model: A comparative analysis for bug report priority
and severity prediction,” in Proceedings of the 20th International
Conference on Predictive Models and Data Analytics in Software
Engineering, 2024, pp. 2–11.
[928] E. Mashhadi, H. Ahmadvand, and H. Hemmati, “Method-level
bug severity prediction using source code metrics and llms,”
in 2023 IEEE 34th International Symposium on Software Reliability
Engineering (ISSRE). IEEE, 2023, pp. 635–646.
[929] J. Zhu, G. Xiao, Z. Zheng, and Y. Sui, “Enhancing traceability link
recovery with unlabeled data,” in 2022 IEEE 33rd International
Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering (ISSRE). IEEE, 2022,
pp. 446–457.
[930] U. Kulsum, H. Zhu, B. Xu, and M. d’Amorim, “A case study
of llm for automated vulnerability repair: Assessing impact
of reasoning and patch validation feedback,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2405.15690, 2024.
[931] T. Zhang, I. C. Irsan, F. Thung, D. Lo, A. Sharma, and L. Jiang,
“Evaluating pre-trained language models for repairing api mis-
uses,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.16390, 2023.
[932] F. Wu, Q. Zhang, A. P . Bajaj, T. Bao, N. Zhang, R. Wang, C. Xiao
et al., “Exploring the limits of chatgpt in software security appli-
cations,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.05275, 2023.
[933] R. Wang, Z. Li, C. Wang, Y. Xiao, and C. Gao, “Navrepair:
Node-type aware c/c++ code vulnerability repair,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2405.04994, 2024.
[934] Z. S ´agodi, G. Antal, B. Bogenf ¨urst, M. Isztin, P . Heged ˝us, and
R. Ferenc, “Reality check: Assessing gpt-4 in fixing real-world
software vulnerabilities,” in Proceedings of the 28th International
Conference on Evaluation and Assessment in Software Engineering ,
2024, pp. 252–261.

--- PDF PAGE 53 ---
1
APPENDIX A: S UMMARIZATION OF EXISTING LLM S
OF CODE
In the following, we summarize some representative LLMs
of code.
0.1 Encoder-only LLMs
CuBERT.CuBERT [29] is the first attempt to apply BERT to
source code by replicating the training procedure of BERT
on a code corpus. In particular, Kanade et al. [29] construct a
massive corpus of 7.4M Python files from GitHub and pre-
train CuBERT with masked language modeling and next
sentence prediction as the objectives. CuBERT is fine-tuned
on six downstream tasks, including five classification tasks
and one program repair task, demonstrating its superior
performance over LSTM and vanilla Transformer models.
CodeBERT. CodeBERT [8] represents a successful
adaption of BERT from NLP to the source code domain.
CodeBERT follows the BERT architecture ( i.e., a multi-layer
bidirectional Transformer model), but unlike BERT, which
only considers natural language (NL), CodeBERT takes
into account both NL and programming language (PL).
Regarding input representation, CodeBERT’s input is
divided into two parts: NL and PL, forming the format
[CLS ], w1, w2, ..., wn, [SEP ], c1, c2, ..., cm, [EOS ], where
the special marker [CLS ] is positioned before these
two segments. CodeBERT’s output comprises contextual
representations for each token and the representation of
[CLS ]. In the pre-training phase, CodeBERT employs
two training objectives: masked language modeling and
replaced token detection. The first objective aims to predict
the original tokens that are masked, a goal established by
Devlin et al. [5], where only bimodal data (NL-PL pairs) are
utilized for training. The second objective is optimized to
train on both unimodal and multimodal data, implying that
the generator uses both NL and PL data.
Compared with CuBERT [29], CodeBERT is more power-
ful due to several improvements during pre-training. First,
CuBERT is pre-trained with code snippets, while Code-
BERT is pre-trained with both bimodal NL-PL data and
unimodal PL/NL data. Second, CuBERT is only pre-trained
with Python, while CodeBERT is pre-trained with six pro-
gramming languages. Third, CuEBRT follows the objectives
of BERT, while CodeBERT is trained with a new learning
objective based on replaced token detection.
GraphCodeBERT: Structure-aware Pre-training for
Source Code. Although CodeBERT introduces code snip-
pets during pre-training, its training paradigm is still de-
rived from NLP by regarding a code snippet as a sequence
of tokens while overlooking the inherent structure of source
code. In 2020, Guo et al. [30] introduce GraphCodeBERT,
a graph-based LLM built upon the BERT architecture de-
signed for code-related applications. GraphCodeBERT em-
ploys a representation approach rooted in data flow learning
for code. It involves extracting ASTs through tree-sitter and
capturing variables from the ASTs to form a sequence of
variables. The relationships between extracted variables,
such as data source connections, are used to construct a
data flow graph. During the model’s pre-training phase,
GraphCodeBERT introduces two innovative training tasks
alongside the inherited MLM task from CodeBERT, i.e.,
edge prediction and node alignment. The edge prediction
task aims to learn code structural information by predicting
edges within the data flow graph, while the node alignment
task aims to learn which specific node in the data flow graph
corresponds to which code token in the input code. Besides,
to accommodate the structure of AST graphs, GraphCode-
BERT employs graph-guided masked attention.
0.2 Encoder-decoder LLMs
PYMT5: First Attempt of Encoder-decoder LLM. Similar
to CuBERT [29] in the encoder-only LLM domain, as early
as 2020, PYMT5 [33] is the first attempt to apply encoder-
decoder LLMs to source code by replicating the pre-training
process of T5 on a code corpus. PYMT5 is pre-trained
with a similar span masking objective from T5 on 26 mil-
lion Python code snippets and built on an encode-decoder
Transformer with 374 million parameters. PYMT5 is fine-
tuned with two tasks, i.e., method and comment generation,
demonstrating superior performance against GPT-2.
T5-Learning: Adaption of T5 for Source Code. In
parallel with PYMT5 [33], Mastropaolo et al. [34] propose
T5-learning, to empirically investigate how the T5 model
performs when pre-trained and fine-tuned to support code-
related tasks. T5-learning is first pre-trained in a self-
supervised way from T5 on CodeSearchNet with both nat-
ural language text and programming language code, i.e.,
masking tokens in code and asking the model to guess the
masked tokens. T5-learning is then fine-tuned to support
four downstream tasks, i.e., program repair, mutant injec-
tion, assertion generation, and code summarization. The
results demonstrate that T5-learning outperforms previous
baselines, showcasing the potential of T5 in code-related
tasks.
PLBART: BART-based LLM for Code. Unlike
PYMT5 [33] only focusing on Python code generation,
in 2021, Ahmad et al. [35] propose PLBART, an encoder-
decoder LLM capable of performing a broad spectrum
of code understanding and generation tasks. PLABRT is
pre-trained with the denoising objective and built on the
BART architecture. During the pre-training, PLABRT learns
to reconstruct an original text that is corrupted using an
arbitrary noise function, including three noise strategies
in this work, i.e., token masking, token deletion, and to-
ken infilling. PLBART is fine-tuned for two categories of
four downstream tasks ( i.e., code generation, translation,
summarization, and classification) across seven program-
ming languages. The experimental results demonstrate that
PLBART outperforms previous LLMs, such as CodeBERT
and GraphCodeBERT, demonstrating its promise in both
code understanding and generation.
CodeT5: Code-aware T5-based LLM. Despite introduc-
ing source code, PLBART simply processes code snippets as
natural language and ignores the code-specific characteris-
tics. CodeT5 [8] represents a successful adaption of encoder-
decoder LLMs from NLP to the source code domain and
has been widely used in SE research. In 2021, Wang et al. [9]
introduce CodeT5, a unified encoder-decoder LLM based
on the T5 architecture by leveraging the code semantics
from the developer-assigned identifiers. CodeT5 considers
two types of input representations based on whether a

--- PDF PAGE 54 ---
2
code snippet has a corresponding NL description: unimodal
(i.e., PL) and bimodal ( i.e., PL-NL pairs) data. To encode
the input data, CodeT5 concatenates PL and NL into a
whole sequence X with a delimiter token [SEP ], i.e., X =
(w1, · · · , wn, [SEP ], c1, · · · , cm, [SEP ]]), where n and m
denote the number of NL word tokens and PL code tokens,
respectively. CodeT5 employs three identifier-aware pre-
training tasks ( i.e., masked span prediction, masked identi-
fier prediction, and identifier tagging) to consider the crucial
token type information and a bimodal dual generation pre-
training task to learn a better NL-PL alignment between the
code and its accompanying comment. CodeT5 is then fine-
tuned with the CodeXGLUE benchmark to perform both
code generation and understanding tasks, i.e., code summa-
rization, code generation, code translation, code refinement,
defect detection, and clone detection. The results demon-
strate that CodeT5 significantly outperforms previous LLMs
in most downstream tasks, such as RoBERTa, CodeBERT,
GraphCodeBERT, GPT2, CodeGPT, and PLBART.
SPT-Code. However, previous LLMs simply reuse
the pre-training tasks designed for NL, while failing
to learn the the connection between a piece of code
and the associated NL for code-related tasks. In May
2022, Niu et al. [37] introduce SPT-Code, which is a
sequence-to-sequence LLM designed for source code. When
given a complete method, SPT-Code aims to acquire
general knowledge from the method’s source code, its
underlying code structure, and the corresponding nat-
ural language description. The input is represented as
{c1, · · · , cl, [SEP ], a1, · · · , am, [SEP ], n1, · · · , np}, where l
represents the number of code tokens, m denotes the length
of the linearized Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) sequence, and
p signifies the number of tokens in the natural language
description. SPT-Code introduces three specialized code-
specific pre-training tasks, i.e., Code-AST Prediction (CAP),
Masked Sequence to Sequence (MASS), and Method Name
Generation (MNG). Each of these tasks enables SPT-Code
to capture a distinct aspect of the data instance. Specifically,
CAP focuses on understanding the source code by masking
a random fragment of the code tokens. MNG aims to predict
whether a given AST accurately represents a particular
code fragment, thereby gaining insights into the syntactic
structure. Finally, MNG’s objective is to generate subtokens
corresponding to the method name, a concise natural lan-
guage description of the method. These three pre-training
tasks are meticulously designed to enable SPT-Code to learn
about source code, its underlying structure, and the natural
language descriptions associated with it. Importantly, SPT-
Code does not rely on any bilingual corpora. This knowl-
edge is leveraged when SPT-Code is applied to downstream
tasks, making use of these three informational sources.
CodeRL: CodeT5-derived LLM for program synthesis.
Unlike previous general-propose LLMs, in 2022, Le et al.
[38] propose CodeRL, a successor of CodeT5, for the pro-
gram synthesis task based on deep reinforcement learn-
ing. CodeRL is built on top of CodeT5-large architecture
with (1) an enlarged pre-training dataset, which has 10.5B
tokens and is 10x larger than the CodeSearchNet corpus
used in the original CodeT5; and (2) enhanced learning
objectives, i.e., masked span prediction and next-token pre-
diction. In particular, CodeRL considers program synthesis
as a reinforcement learning problem and applies the actor-
critic reinforcement learning method, enhancing CodeT5’s
performance by leveraging unit test signals during model
optimization and generation.
CoditT5: CodeT5-derived LLM for Code Editing. De-
spite achieving impressive performance in numerous code-
related generation tasks, previous LLMs are not well-suited
for editing tasks. In 2022, Zhang et al. [39] propose CoditT5,
an encoder-decoder LLM for code-related editing tasks
based on CodeT5. Initialized from the CodeT5-base model,
CoditT5 is pre-trained with an edit-aware pre-training objec-
tive on the CodeSearchNet dataset, i.e., generating the edit-
based output sequence given the corrupted input sequence.
CoditT5 is fine-tuned on three downstream tasks, includ-
ing comment updating, bug fixing, and automated code
review, demonstrating superior performance against previ-
ous generation-based LLMs ( e.g., PLBART and CodeT5) in
tackling code editing tasks, such as program repair.
AlphaCode: Competition-level Code Generation LLM.
Despite demonstrating remarkable abilities in code gener-
ation, previous LLMs have shown limited success when
confronted with competition-level programming problems
that require problem-solving skills beyond simply trans-
lating instructions into code. In 2022, Li et al. [40] from
DeepMind propose AlphaCode, an encoder-decoder LLM
specifically designed to generate solutions for competitive
programming solutions problems that require deep rea-
soning. AlphaCode is built on top of an encoder-decoder
transformer-based architecture and is pre-trained with 86.31
million files across 13 programming languages from public
GitHub repositories. The encoder and decoder are pre-
trained with masked language modeling and next-token
prediction objectives, respectively. AlphaCode takes the
problem description as input to the encoder and generates a
code autoregressively from the decoder one token at a time
until an end-of-code token is produced. AlphaCode is then
fine-tuned with the CodeContests dataset and the results
show that AlphaCode performs roughly at the level of the
median competitor, i.e., achieving on average a ranking of
top 54.3% in competitions with more than 5,000 participants.
CodeT5+: successor LLM of CodeT5. Although existing
LLMs are adept at learning rich contextual representations
applicable to a variety of code-related tasks, they often rely
on a limited set of pre-training objectives. Such objectives
might result in substantial performance degradation in cer-
tain downstream tasks due to the discrepancy between the
pre-training and fine-tuning stages. In 2023, Wang et al. [41]
present CodeT5+, a successor of CodeT5 where component
modules can be flexibly combined to accommodate a wide
range of downstream code tasks. CodeT5+ is pre-trained
with two objectives (i.e., span denoising and causal language
modeling) on unimodal code corpora and two objectives(i.e.,
text-code contrastive learning and text-code matching) on
bimodal text-code corpora. Codet5+ is built on top of the
encoder-decoder Transformer architecture and is classified
into two groups according to mode size. CodeT5+ 220M and
770M are trained from scratch following T5’s architecture
and CodeT5+ 2B, 6B, 16B are initialized from off-the-shelf
CodeGen checkpoints [54]. The evaluation experiments are
conducted on 20 code-related benchmarks under different
settings, including zero-shot, fine-tuning, and instruction-

--- PDF PAGE 55 ---
3
tuning. The experimental results demonstrate that CodeT5+
achieves substantial performance on various code-related
tasks, such as code generation and completion, math pro-
gramming, and text-to-code retrieval tasks
JuPyT5: PyMT5-derived LLM for Jupyter Notebook.
Unlike existing LLMs generating code from descriptions,
in 2022, Chandel et al. [42] propose JuPyT5, an encoder-
decoder LLM designed as a data science assistant for the
Jupyter Notebook. JuPyT5 is built on the BART architecture
and initialized from a pre-trained PyMT5 checkpoint with
the same training hyperparameters. JuPyT5 is then pre-
trained with a cell-infilling objective on a Data Science
Problems (DSP) dataset, which is constructed from almost
all publicly available Jupyter Notebook GitHub repositories.
DSP consists of 1119 problems curated from 306 pedagogical
notebooks with 92 dataset dependencies, natural language
and Markdown problem descriptions, and assert-based unit
tests. These problems are designed to assess university stu-
dents’ mastery of various Python implementations in Math
and Data Science. The experimental results demonstrate
that JuPyT5 achieves a 77.5% success rate in solving DSP
problems based on 100 sampling attempts, proving the
potential of using LLMs as data science assistants.
ERNIE-Code: Multilingual-NL-and-PL LLM. Despite
achieving impressive performance in various SE tasks, ex-
isting LLMs has been essentially connecting English texts
(e.g., comments or docstring) and multilingual code snippets
(e.g., Python and Java). Such an English-centricity issue
dramatically limits the application of such LLMs in practice,
given that 95% of the world’s population are non-native
English speakers. In 2023, Chaiet al. [43] from Baidu propose
ERNIE-Code, which is a unified LLM designed to bridge
the gap between multilingual natural languages (NLs)
and multilingual programming languages (PLs). The cross-
lingual NL-PL ability of ERNIE-Code is learned from two
pre-training tasks, i.e., span-corruption language modeling
and Pivot-based translation language modeling. The former
learns intra-modal patterns from PL or NL only, while
the latter learns cross-modal alignment from many NLs
and PLs. ERNIE-Code is built on the T5 encoder-decoder
architecture and trained on PL corpus ( i.e., CodeSearchNe
with six PLs), monolingual NL corpus ( i.e., CC100 with
monolingual NLs), and parallel NL corpus ( i.e., OPUS with
105 bilingual pairs). ERNIE-Code is capable of understand-
ing and generating code and text in 116 different NLs and 6
PLs, and outperforms previous LLMs such as PLBART and
CodeT5 in various code tasks, such as code-to-text, text-to-
code, code-to-code, and text-to-text generation. Importantly,
ERNIE-Code demonstrates superior performance in zero-
shot prompting for multilingual code summarization and
text-to-text translation.
0.3 Decoder-only LLMs
GPT-C: first attempt LLM for Code Generation.As early as
2020, Svyatkovskiy et al. [50] from Microsoft propose GPT-
C, a variant of the GPT-2 trained from scratch on a large
unsupervised multilingual source code dataset. GPT-C is a
multi-layer generative transformer model trained to predict
sequences of code tokens of arbitrary types, generating
up to entire lines of syntactically correct code. The pre-
training dataset contains 1.2 billion lines of code in Python,
C#, JavaScript, and TypeScript. The experimental results
demonstrate that GPT-C achieves an average edit similarity
of 86.7% on code completion tasks for Python programming
language. Importantly, GPT-C is implemented as a cloud-
based web service, offering real-time code completion sug-
gestions in Visual Studio Code IDE and Azure Notebook
environments.
CodeGPT: a variant of GPT-2 for Source Code In
2021, similar to GPT-C, Lu et al. [51] from Microsoft pro-
pose CodeGPT, a decoder-only Transformer-based LLM,
following the model architecture and training objectives
of GPT-2. As one of the baseline LLMs in CodeXGLUE,
CodeGPT is designed to support code completion and text-
to-code generation tasks. CodeGPT undergoes pre-training
on the CodeSearchNet dataset, particularly focusing on
the Python and Java corpora. There exist two versions of
CodeGPT, i.e., the original CodeGPT, which is pre-trained
from scratch with randomly initialized parameters; and
CodeGPT-adapted, which is re-trained from the checkpoint
of GPT-2 on the code corpus. The experimental results show
that in code completion tasks on the PY150 and Github
Java Corpus datasets, CodeGPT achieves a performance
of 70.65%, while its enhanced version, CodeGPT-adapted,
reaches 71.28%. In the text-to-code generation task on the
CONCODE dataset, CodeGPT attains a CodeBLEU perfor-
mance of 32.71%, and CodeGPT-adapted achieves 35.98%.
Codex: A descendant of GPT-3 for Code Tasks Inspired
by the considerable success of LLMs (such as GPT-3) in
NLP and the abundance of publicly available code, Chen et
al. [52] from OpenAI propose Codex, a descendant of GPT-
3 model fine-tuned with publicly available code corpus
from GitHub. Codex is primarily trained for the task of
generating independent Python functions from docstrings.
The HumanEval benchmark is constructed to evaluate the
functional correctness of generated code with 164 hand-
written programming problems, each accompanied by a
function signature, docstring, body, and several unit tests.
The experimental results demonstrate that Codex exhibits
remarkable performance, with its model solving more prob-
lems on the HumanEval dataset than GPT-3 and GPT-J,
achieving a success rate of 28.8%. Furthermore, Codex can
solve 70.2% of the questions using a repeated sampling
strategy, with 100 samples per question. This suggests that
generating multiple samples from the model and selecting
the optimal solution is a highly effective approach for chal-
lenging prompts. Importantly, Codex and descendants are
deployed in GitHub Copilot, indicating the power of LLMs
in transforming the landscape of code-related tasks.
PolyCoder: open-sourced LLM comparable to Codex.
Despite the impressive success of LLMs of code, some
powerful LLMs (such as Codex) are not publicly available,
preventing the research community from studying and im-
proving such LLMs. In 2022, Xu et al. [53] propose Poly-
Coder, a decoder-only LLM based on GPT-2 architecture.
PolyCoder is trained with 249GB of code from 12 pro-
gramming languages and contains three sizes, 160M, 400M,
and 2.7B parameters. The results demonstrate that despite
Codex’s primary focus on Python, it still performs well on
other programming languages, even outperforming GPT-J
and GPT-NeoX. However, for the C programming language,
PolyCoder outperforms all LLMs including Codex. Impor-

--- PDF PAGE 56 ---
4
tantly, unlike Codex, three PolyCoder models of different
sizes are made available for the research community.
CodeGen: LLM for program synthesis. To investigate
program synthesis with LLMs, in 2023, Nijkamp et al. [54]
from Salesforce introduce CodeGen, which employs a self-
regressive Transformer architecture and is trained sequen-
tially on natural language and programming language
datasets (THEPILE, BIGQUERY, and BIGPYTHON). It is
designed for multi-round program synthesis. CodeGen un-
dergoes evaluation for both single-round and multi-round
program synthesis. In single-round evaluation, the synthetic
benchmark HumanEval is utilized, and it is observed that
CodeGen performance improves with data sizes. Exper-
imental results demonstrate that the performance of the
CodeGen NL model either surpasses or is comparable to
that of GPT-NEO and GPT-J. CodeGen-Multi demonstrates
a significant performance advantage over GPT-NEO, GPT-
J, and CodeGen-NL. Furthermore, CodeGen-Mono, fine-
tuned on a pure Python dataset, exhibits remarkable en-
hancements in program synthesis.
InCoder: LLM for Code Infilling and Synthesis. Ex-
isting LLMs generate code in a left-to-right manner, which
may be unsuitable to many many ubiquitous code editing
tasks, such as bug fixing. In 2022, Fried et al. [14] from
Facebook propose InCoder, a decoder-only LLM designed
for program synthesis and editing. InCoder is pre-trained by
a causal masking objective,i.e., learning through the random
replacement of code segments with sentinel tokens, moving
them to the end of the sequence. InCoder’s training data
consists solely of open-licensed code (Apache 2.0, MIT, BSD-
2, and BSD-3 licenses) from online sources such as GitHub,
GitLab, and StackOverflow. It primarily focuses on Python
and JavaScript but encompasses a total of 28 languages,
amounting to approximately 200GB of data in total. There
are two versions of the publicly released pre-trained models:
one with 6.7 billion parameters and another with 1.3 bil-
lion parameters. The experimental results demonstrate that
InCoder is able to infill arbitrary regions of code under a
zero-shot setting for several tasks, such as type inference
and comment generation ,InCoder achieves performance
roughly equivalent to CodeGen-Multi on the HumanEval
benchmark.
PyCodeGPT: LLM for library-oriented code generation.
Previous state-of-the-art LLMs are not publicly available,
hindering the progress of related research topics and ap-
plications. Similar to PolyCoder [53], in 2022, Zan et al. [55]
propose PyCodeGPT, a publicly available LLM particular
designed for Python. PyCodeGPT is derived from GPT-Neo
125M with a vocabulary size of 32K and incorporates a
novel byte-level BPE tokenizer tailored for Python source
code. The training dataset consists of 13 million Python files
with 96GB crawled from GitHub. The experimental results
demonstrate that PyCodeGPT achieves a pass@1 score of
8.33% and pass@10 of 13.53% on the HumanEval bench-
mark, surpassing other LLMs with similar parameters, such
as AlphaCode, CodeClippy, and CodeParrot.
SantaCoder. Regarding the removal of personally iden-
tifiable information, the BigCode community [56] propose
SantaCoder, a decoder-only LLM with 1.1 billion param-
eters. SantaCoder’s architecture is based on GPT-2 with
multi-query attention and Fill-in-the-Middle objective. Its
training dataset consists of Python, Java, and JavaScript files
from The Stack v1.1. The dataset has undergone several
preprocessing steps, including partial data removal, near-
duplication removal, de-identification of personally identi-
fiable information, and filtering based on line length and
the percentage of alphanumeric characters. Files containing
test samples from benchmarks such as HumanEval, APPS,
MBPP , and MultiPL-E have also been excluded. The exper-
imental results on the MultiPL-E benchmark demonstrate
that SantaCoder outperforms InCoder-6.7B and CodeGen-
2.7B in code generation and filling tasks.
StarCoder. Committed to developing responsible LLMs,
Li et al. [57] from Hugging Face present StarCoder and Star-
CoderBase, which are LLMs for code. StarCoder is trained
on Stack v1.2, and to ensure the secure release of open-
source LLMs, it has improved the personally identifiable in-
formation editing pipeline and introduced innovative attri-
bution tracking tools. StarCoder undergoes evaluations on
HumanEval and MBPP , the experimental results show that
StarCoder outperforms PaLM, LaMDA, LLaMA, CodeGen-
16B-Mono, and OpenAI’s code-cushman-001 (12B) on Hu-
manEval.
PanGu-Coder: LLM for text-to-code generation. To ad-
dress the specific task of text-to-code generation, adapt to
more specific language domains, and handle signals beyond
natural language, In 2022, Christopoulou1 et al. [58] from
Huawei propose PanGu-Coder, a decoder-only LLM for
text-to-code generation, i.e., generating stand-alone Python
functions from docstrings and evaluating the correctness
of code examples through unit tests. PanGu-Coder is built
on top of the PanGu-Alpha architecture, a uni-directional
decoder-only transformer with an extra query layer stacked
on top. PanGu-Coder is trained with two objectives, i.e., a
causal language modeling on raw programming language
data, and a combination of causal language modeling and
masked language modeling for the downstream task of text-
to-code generation. The results under a zero-shot manner
show that PanGu-Coder outperforms industry LLMs such
as Codex and AlphaCode on the HumanEval and MBPP
datasets.
PanGu-Coder2: LLM with Reinforcement Learning.
Inspired by the success of Reinforcement Learning from
Human Feedback in LLMs, in 2023, Shen et al. [59] pro-
pose PanGu-Coder2, a successor of PanGu-Coder with
more powerful code generation capability. PanGu-Coder2 is
trained with a new training paradigm, i.e., Rank Responses
to align Test&Teacher Feedback and built on top of the
advanced StarCoder 15B model. The experimental results
demonstrate that PanGu-Coder2 is able to outperform pre-
vious LLMs, such as StarCoder, CodeT5+, and AlphaCode
on HumanEval, CodeEval, and LeetCode benchmarks.
PaLM-Coder: a variant of PaLM for source code. To
investigate the captivity of PaLM for source code, in 2022,
Chowdhery et al. [60] from Google propose PaLM-Coder,
a variant of PaLM by code-specific fine-tuning. The based
model PaLM is pre-trained with a high-quality corpus of
780 billion tokens, including 196GB of source code from
open-source repositories on GitHub. PaLM-Coder is further
derived from PaLM with a two-stage fine-tuning process,
i.e., (1) an initial fine-tuning over 6.5 billion tokens, consist-
ing of a blend with 60% Python code, 30% multi-language

--- PDF PAGE 57 ---
5
code and 10% natural language; and (2) an extended fine-
tuning with 1.9 billion Python code tokens. The experimen-
tal results show that PaLM-Coder is able to achieve 88.4%
pass@100 on HumanEval and 80.8% pass@80 on MBPP . Be-
sides, PaLM-Coder demonstrates impressive performance
on the DeepFix code repair task with a compile rate of
82.1%, opening up opportunities for fixing complex errors
that arise during software development.
CodeGeeX: LLM for Multilingual Code Generation.
Despite demonstrating impressive performance, previous
LLMs (such as Codex) mainly focus on code generation
and are closed-source. In 2023, Zheng et al. [61] intro-
duce CodeGeeX, a multilingual decoder-only open-sourced
LLM with 13 billion parameters for both code generation
and translation tasks. CodeGeeX is implemented with the
Huawei MindSpore framework and pre-trained on 850
billion tokens from 23 programming languages, including
C++, Java, JavaScript, and Go. Besides, on top of the well-
known HumanEval benchmark, a multilingual code gener-
ation benchmark HumanEval-X is constructed to evaluate
CodeGeeX by hand-writing the solutions in C++, Java,
JavaScript, and Go. The experimental results demonstrate
that CodeGeeX performs exceptionally well in code genera-
tion and translation tasks on the HumanEval-X benchmark.
Importantly, CodeGeeX has been integrated with Visual
Studio Code, JetBrains, and Cloud Studio. It generates 4.7
billion tokens weekly for tens of thousands of active de-
velopers, enhancing the coding efficiency of 83.4% of its
users. Besides, CodeGeeX is open-sourced, as well as its
code, model weights, API, and HumanEval-X, facilitating
the understanding and advances in the community.
CodeGen2: A Successor of CodeGen. Considering the
high computational cost of training LLMs, in 2023, Ni-
jkamp et al. [62] propose CodeGen2, an successor of Code-
Gen, aimed at addressing the challenge of more efficiently
training LLMs for program synthesis and understanding
tasks. CodeGen2 provide a training framework along with
open-source CodeGen2 models in four variations, including
1B, 3.7B, 7B, and 16B parameters in size. CodeGen2 is
trained on the BigPython dataset and evaluated on the
Stack dataset to assess its learning performance in Hu-
manEval and HumanEval-Infill tasks. The experimental
results demonstrate that CodeGen2 performs well across
various model sizes and program synthesis and under-
standing tasks, outperforming InCoder in the evaluation on
HumanEval.
Code Llama: Llama-based LLM for Source Code. On
top of the powerful Llama 2 model in NLP , in 2023,
Roziere et al. [86] from Meta AI propose Code Llama, a
series of LLMs specialized in handling code-related tasks.
Code Llama exhibits capabilities such as infilling, support
for large input contexts, and zero-shot instruction-following
abilities. The dataset of Code Llama primarily comprises an
extensive collection of programming language content, with
a special emphasis on Python language, trained through a
code-heavy dataset containing 500B tokens and an addi-
tional Python-intensive data mix of 100B tokens. It com-
prises multiple versions, covering Code Llama, Code Llama
- Python, and Code Llama - Instruct with 7B, 13B and
34B parameters each. Code Llama undergoes evaluation on
HumanEval and MBPP , the experimental results indicate
that Code Llama outperforms LLama and Llama 2 in terms
of performance.

--- PDF PAGE 58 ---
6
RQ2
Software Requirements & Design
Ambiguity detection [102] [101] [100] [474] [103]
GUI Layouts [104] [105]
Requirement Classification [475] [94] [92] [91] [476] [93] [477]
Requirement Completeness
Detection [107]
Requirement Elicitation [108]
Requirement Engineering [478] [479] [480] [481] [482] [483] [484]
Use Case Generation [115]
Requirement Prioritization [109]
Requirement
Summarization [110]
Requirement Traceability [111] [112]
Requirements Quality
Assurance [98] [95] [97] [96]
Software Modeling [485] [486] [114] [487] [113]
Specification Generation [88] [90] [89]
Specifications Repair [99]
Class Diagram
Derivation [488] [489]
Fig. 3: Taxonomy of the application of LLMs in different domains within software engineering
APPENDIX B: D ETAILED SUMMARIZATION OF EX-
ISTING LLM- BASED SE STUDIES

--- PDF PAGE 59 ---
7
RQ2
Software Development
API Documentation
Smells [189]
API Inference [190] [490] [191] [192]
API recommendation [197] [198] [194] [193] [195] [196]
Code Comment
Completion [160]
Code Completion
[461] [491] [53] [180] [181] [492] [173] [493] [494] [495] [175] [496] [497] [307] [182] [498] [499]
[500] [174] [501] [502] [172] [503] [504] [505] [506] [507] [508] [176] [177] [179] [178] [509] [510]
[511]
Code Compression [200] [199]
Code Editing [188] [186] [512] [187] [513]
Code Generation
[514] [416] [134] [515] [516] [517] [518] [129] [116] [519] [121] [145] [520] [521] [522] [119] [523]
[524] [525] [526] [527] [528] [529] [530] [531] [532] [533] [130] [534] [128] [535] [536] [120] [537]
[538] [539] [540] [541] [542] [146] [543] [544] [545] [546] [142] [547] [548] [140] [549] [137] [550]
[551] [552] [553] [141] [554] [555] [556] [557] [558] [559] [132] [139] [560] [561] [562] [563] [564]
[565] [52] [566] [567] [568] [569] [570] [571] [133] [572] [573] [135] [574] [124] [575] [576] [131]
[577] [424] [578] [579] [580] [581] [582] [583] [122] [584] [585] [586] [578] [587] [588] [589] [590]
[591] [592] [138] [127] [593] [594] [595] [596] [597] [118] [598] [599] [600] [601] [602] [603] [604]
[605] [606] [126] [125] [607] [117] [608] [609] [143] [610] [611] [612] [613] [614] [123] [615] [616]
[617] [618] [619] [620] [621] [622] [623] [624] [625] [626] [144] [627] [628] [629] [630] [631] [55]
Code Representation [203] [148] [202] [205] [204] [201]
Code Search [154] [152] [632] [151] [149] [633] [634] [150] [635] [147] [636] [153] [637] [638] [639] [640] [641]
Code Summarization
[472] [642] [470] [167] [643] [644] [645] [171] [171] [166] [646] [170] [647] [648] [649] [161] [650]
[168] [651] [652] [162] [653] [654] [655] [165] [656] [164] [657] [658] [659] [660] [661] [662] [663]
[169] [664] [665] [666] [667] [668] [170] [669]
Code Translation [670] [671] [672] [673] [469] [674] [675] [155] [676] [677] [678] [157] [679] [680] [681] [682] [683] [684]
[156] [685] [686] [687] [688] [158]
Code Understanding [689] [207] [208] [690] [691] [206] [692] [693] [694] [695] [696] [697]
Continuous Development [209]
Identifier normalization
Derivation [210]
Microservice
Recommendation [211]
Neural Architecture
Search [212]
Program Synthesis [698] [699] [700] [184] [701] [702] [703] [704] [183] [705] [706] [707] [185]
SO post title
generation [708] [214]
Type inference [215]
Unified Development [216]
Code Recommendation [709] [710]
Control flow
graph generation [711]
Data Analysis [712]
Method Name Generation [713]
Project Planning [714]
SO Question Answering [715] [716]
Data Augmentation [717] [213]
Fig. 3: Taxonomy of the application of LLMs in different domains within software engineering (Continue)

--- PDF PAGE 60 ---
8
RQ2
Software Testing
Invariant Prediction [718]
GUI Testing [719] [291] [294] [292] [293]
Proof Generation [720]
Indirect Call Analysis [721]
Resource Leak Detection [722]
Mutation Testing [289] [286] [723] [285] [290] [724] [725] [726] [727] [288] [287] [728]
Taint Analysis [729]
NLP Testing [298] [300] [297] [296] [299] [301] [295]
Vulnerability Detection
[730] [731] [732] [733] [236] [734] [735] [736] [737] [738] [238] [739] [740] [741] [742] [743] [744]
[745] [746] [747] [748] [749] [750] [751] [752] [753] [754] [755] [234] [235] [756] [757] [758] [759]
[760] [761] [761] [762] [473] [763] [106] [764] [765] [766] [767] [768] [769] [770] [771] [772] [237]
[773] [774] [775] [468] [776] [777] [778] [779] [780] [781] [782] [783] [784] [785] [786] [787] [788]
[789] [790] [791]
Penetration Testing [792] [282] [280] [281]
Program Analysis [793]
Adversarial Attack [310] [794]
Program Reduction [311]
API Misuse Detection [795]
API Testing [302]
Assertion Generation [261] [262] [796] [263] [797] [798] [259] [17] [260] [264]
Binary Code
Similarity Detection [799] [800] [801] [802]
Code Execution [303]
Decompilation [226] [231] [224] [228] [225] [229] [230] [227]
Failure-Inducing Testing [284]
Fault Localization [221] [803] [804] [223] [223] [805] [806] [218] [807] [222] [220] [808] [809] [219] [810] [217] [811]
Fuzzing [273] [269] [272] [279] [278] [270] [267] [267] [266] [351] [275] [277] [271] [274] [276] [268]
Formal Verification [812] [813] [814] [815]
Static Analysis [304] [305] [307] [306] [816] [817]
Static Warning
Validating [818]
Test Generation
[819] [820] [821] [822] [252] [253] [823] [824] [248] [240] [825] [826] [251] [247] [249] [827] [243]
[244] [828] [829] [242] [830] [254] [831] [832] [833] [834] [430] [258] [835] [257] [255] [836] [256]
[309] [837] [246] [838] [250] [839] [840] [245] [841] [842]
Test Suite Minimization [265]
Vulnerable Dependency
Alert Detection [308]
Theorem Proving [309]
Property-based Testing [283]
Fig. 3: Taxonomy of the application of LLMs in different domains within software engineering (Continue)

--- PDF PAGE 61 ---
9
RQ2
Software Maintenance
Android Permissions [409]
APP Review Analysis [843] [844]
Bug Report Detection [372] [371] [845] [846] [847]
Code Clone Detection [848] [394] [849] [850] [395] [396] [851] [852] [853]
Bug Reproduction [374] [854] [373] [375]
Code Coverage
Prediction [855]
Bug Triaging [397] [398] [856]
Code Evolution [159]
Code Review [857] [858] [859] [860] [861] [862] [366] [863] [864] [865] [367] [866] [369] [867] [368] [868] [370]
[869] [870] [871] [872] [873] [874] [365]
Code Refactoring [875] [876] [877] [878]
Code Smells [399]
Commit Message
Generation [363] [879] [364] [360] [362]
Compiler Optimization [408] [880] [881] [882] [883] [884] [885] [407]
Debugging [886]
Exception Handling
Recommendation [401]
Flaky Test Prediction [887]
Incident Management [403] [402]
Log Analysis [393] [888] [392] [384] [889] [383] [382] [890] [381] [891] [390] [386] [379] [387] [380] [388] [385]
[892] [893]
Issue Labeling [404] [856]
Mobile App Crash
Detection [894]
Log Anomaly Detection [895]
Outage Understanding [896]
Sentiment Analysis [897] [898] [899] [900]
Patch Correctness
Assessment [357] [353] [359] [355] [358] [354]
Tag Recommendation [901]
Privacy Policy [405]
Technical Debt
Management [902]
Program Repair
[903] [314] [323] [904] [330] [341] [905] [313] [329] [906] [326] [11] [336] [328] [347] [346] [16]
[907] [908] [322] [333] [335] [315] [316] [344] [324] [909] [332] [910] [911] [18] [318] [912] [325]
[312] [327] [331] [356] [343] [13] [913] [320] [317] [914] [915] [916] [339] [917] [460] [334] [918]
[340] [321] [919] [345] [338] [920] [921] [319] [922] [342] [923] [337] [924] [925]
Test Update [377] [378] [376]
Report Severity
Prediction [926] [927] [928]
Traceability Link
Recovery [929]
Vulnerability Repair [930] [931] [351] [932] [15] [850] [933] [12] [934] [349] [348] [352]
Software Management
Developers’ Behavior
Analysis [400]
Effort Estimation [410] [411]
Software Tool
Configuration [412]
Software Repository
Mining [414]
Fig. 3: Taxonomy of the application of LLMs in different domains within software engineering (Continue)