--- PDF PAGE 1 ---
Stat Papers
DOI 10.1007/s00362-013-0533-y
BOOK REVIEW
Kahneman, D. (2011): Thinking, Fast and Slow
Penguin, 496 pp., e 10.50, ISBN 978-0141033570
Walter Krämer
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013
This book is an eye-opener in various ways. From the viewpoint of statistics, it demon-
strates once more that real progress in this ﬁeld does not derive from advanced math-
ematics, but from asking the right questions and from setting up clever experiments.
From the viewpoint of economics, it adds additional doubts to the usefulness of the
homo oeconomicus as a proper model of human decision making, and from the view-
point of psychology, it summarizes numerous surprising insights into the way the
human brain is actually working which Kahneman has accumulated – often together
with Amos Tversky – over the course of his brilliant career.
The most far-reaching of these insights concerns the mechanics of the human brain,
which Kahneman views as two coexisting modes of thinking (“fast and slow”, as the
title says). The ﬁrst, the fast one, is System 1: System 1 is always working in the
background, without our conscious mind being actively involved, trying to make sense
of the myriads of information items rushing in at any interval of time. This it does
surprisingly well, but sometimes various shortcuts are compromising its efﬁciency.
It is this ﬁeld of cognitive heuristics and biases that Kahneman and Tverski have
dominated over the last decades, two of their most inﬂuential papers are reprinted here
in full. System 2, on the other hand, requires active participation by the owner of the
brain and is therefore much more demanding and much slower. And much of the book
is then devoted to showing how System 1 und System 2 cooperate (most of the time)
or obstruct each other (sometimes). While most of the pioneering work in this area has
been done by Kahneman and coauthors himself, lots of credit is also given to other
contributors, so if one is looking for an authoritative survey of this ﬁeld, at the same
time superbly written and intelligible also to non-experts, there is no better book than
this.
W. Krämer (B)
Fakultät Statistik, Technische Universität Dortmund, Dortmund, Germany
e-mail: walterk@statistik.uni-dortmund.de
123