--- PDF PAGE 1 ---
Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
A Systematic Literature Review on Trust in the
Software Ecosystem
Fang Hou · Slinger Jansen
Received: date / Accepted: date
Abstract
Background: The worldwide software ecosystem is a trust-rich part of the world.
Throughout the software life cycle, software engineers, software end-users, and
other stakeholders collaboratively place their trust in major hubs in the ecosystem,
such as package managers, repository services, and software components. However,
as our reliance on software grows, this trust is frequently violated by bad actors and
crippling vulnerabilities in the software supply chain, endangering our livelihoods
and the resilience of our society.
Purpose: The purpose of this study is to deﬁne trust in the worldwide software
ecosystem, that is, to determine what signiﬁes a trustworthy system or actor.
By improving our understanding of trust, we can create novel mechanisms for
protecting the software ecosystem from vulnerabilities and attacks.
Methods: We conduct a systematic literature review on the concept of trust in the
worldwide software ecosystem. We acknowledge that trust is something between
two actors in the software ecosystem, and we examine what role trust plays in the
relationships between end-users and (1) software products, (2) package managers,
(3) software producing organizations, and (4) software engineers.
Results: Two major ﬁndings emerged from the systematic literature review. To
begin, we provide a deﬁnition of trust in the software ecosystem, including a
theoretical framework that decomposes and signiﬁes a theoretical understanding of
trust. Second, we provide a list of trust factors that can be used to assemble an
overview of software trust.
Conclusion: Trust is critical in the communication between actors in the worldwide
software ecosystem, particularly regarding software selection and evaluation, and
can aﬀect the outcome either positively or negatively. According to the frequency
Fang Hou
Department of Information and Computer Science, Utrecht University, the Netherlands
E-mail: h.fang@uu.nl
Slinger Jansen
Department of Information and Computer Science, Utrecht University, the Netherlands
School of Engineering Science, Lappeenranta University of Technology, Finland E-mail:
slinger.jansen@uu.nl
arXiv:2203.05678v1  [cs.SE]  14 Feb 2022

--- PDF PAGE 2 ---
2 Fang Hou, Slinger Jansen
of the trust factors in the literature, the most signiﬁcant determinants of trust
are software quality, code and structure, and the reputation of software producing
organizations. With this comprehensive overview of trust, a new foundation is laid
for software engineering researchers to understand and use trust to create a reliable
software ecosystem.
Keywords Software ecosystem · Software trust · Software security · Software
package evaluation
Statements and Declarations
The authors have no relevant ﬁnancial or non-ﬁnancial interests to disclose.
No funding was received to assist with the preparation of this manuscript.
Author Slinger Jansen is an Editorial Board Member of Empirical Software Engin-
eering.
1 Introduction
When software engineers are building software, for example, in-house software, they
are constantly being confronted with a choice: build it themselves or integrate a
component from another software producing organization. If the choice is made to
integrate a component, the second choice is a selection problem: there are typically
many options to select from and it depends on the software engineer’s perspective
which factors heaviest in the selection process. Factors such as feature completeness,
software component quality, and technology can all determine whether the software
engineer selects a component, while researchers have called for more structured
approaches to software selection (Farshidi, S. Jansen and Deldar, 2021), the selection
process is typically completely dependent on the context of the software engineer.
The software ecosystem is a trust-rich part of the world. End-users expect a
certain trustworthiness when downloading apps from their favorite application store.
For instance, when the appstore provides checksums, a technology to determine
the authenticity of the received data, for each deliverable, the end-user can ensure
that the data she receives is the same data that came from the software engineer.
Nevertheless, it is more often than not the case that trust is put into Software
Ecosystem (SECO) hubs such as package managers and appstores, without there
actually being a good basis for this trust. Trust can be considered as founded and
unfounded. There are also more soft ways to create founded trust, e.g., ensuring
that the software engineer has been a productive member of the SECO for a
long time, or ensuring that the software developed achieves established quality
levels. Both soft and hard ways do not provide watertight guarantees, as the
external environment can also have an impact on trust, e.g., new attacks from
the external world. According to Sonatype (2021), the number of supply chain
attacks is dramatically increasing, posing signiﬁcant security risks to both software
producing organizations and end-users. For example, bad actors shift their attacks
“upstream” by inserting malicious code to the source code repositories to acquire
a critical advantage of time, allowing malware to spread throughout the supply
chain.
Since we have already mentioned trustworthiness and trust, it is necessary to
explain their diﬀerences, as we found that trust and trustworthiness are used inter-
changeably, and often trustworthiness is mistakenly interpreted as trust (Wright,

--- PDF PAGE 3 ---
A Systematic Literature Review on Trust in the Software Ecosystem 3
2010). Typically, trust is from the trustor’s perspective, it is a belief
that the trusted person will actually do what is expected of her (P. C.
Bauer, 2019; Guo et al., 2014; Jadhav and Sonar, 2011; Mcknight et al., 2011),
while the concept of trustworthiness can be viewed as a probability, i.e.,
the probability that a trustee will act as expected by the trustor (P. C.
Bauer, 2019). Hence, a trustee’s trustworthiness and a trustor’s trust may diﬀer.
In addition, it is found that trustworthiness can be seen as a characteristic of
trust (Becerra, Lunnan and Huemer, 2008), which means trust cannot exist without
a high level of trustworthiness (Heyns and Rothmann, 2015).
Extensive research has shown that trust is crucial in software selection and
evaluation (Bugiel, Davi and Schulz, 2011). Typically, end-users trust in software
is built upon the two following aspects: one is the product should perform its
desired functions and meet their speciﬁc needs; the other is the software producers
should provide reliable services. Software trust diﬀers from software ecosystem
trust in that it concentrates on the software products and their producers. More
information on software trust and software ecosystem trust can be found in Section
4.1.3.
Currently, standards and models have been proposed to assess software trust,
for instance, the Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria (Fogel, 2009) and
the Reliability Growth Model (Littlewood, 1994). However, they are not widely
used. The primary reasons are :
– In light of the diﬀerences in the needs of end-users for various software products,
these models lack comprehensive and uniform criteria for measuring the trust
in all software products (Yan, 2008);
– Most of the factors are abstract and lack clarity or guides that can be used to
quantify trust factors (X. Li et al., 2021);
– There is a lack of breadth of perspective among the criteria for judging the
trustworthiness of software that practitioners would expect. For example, we
rarely receive ratings for various package versions and a few comparable software
producer ratings. Yet, this is precisely what software practitioners are concerned
about when assessing software quality (Goode et al., 2015).
In this context, we conduct a systematic review of the literature (SLR) to better
understand software trust in the software ecosystem and summarize the key impact
factors based on the frequency with which they were mentioned in the studies.
The SLR presented here is part of a larger study of software trust that breaks
a lance by giving trust a proper role in this selection process. By analyzing the
perception and trust of various stakeholders, we provide a comprehensive overview
of the relevant trust concepts. The purpose is to lay the groundwork for research
on the design of trust assessment mechanisms that will place trust at the center of
the selection process for software engineers.
To help understand this study, we develop a model in Figure 1 to depict the
relationship between signiﬁcant trust impact factors and actors in the software
ecosystem. It can serve as a brief overview of the results of this study, a detailed
discussion of which is provided in Section 4.
This research begins with the following outline:
• Section 2 introduces the actors and hubs involved in software selection and
evaluation in the software ecosystem, as well as the workﬂow of the software

--- PDF PAGE 4 ---
4 Fang Hou, Slinger Jansen
packages management. The purpose is to identify relevant trust impacted
elements in the software ecosystem;
• Section 3 presents the research method we used in this literature review, which
works as an acquisition process to collect the software trust concept and trust
factors considered by the software end-users during the software selection;
• Section 4 provides a deﬁnition of software trust as well as a discussion on the
intrinsic and extrinsic trust factors in terms of software components, package
administrators, software production organization, and engineers, respectively.
The results show that quality is the decisive factor for software trust, followed
by software producers and code & structure. Additionally, trust assessment
models typically focus on security, such as data access or user entitlement,
rather than vulnerabilities and attacks;
• Section 5 highlights the eﬀect of trust factors on the software selection, validity,
consideration, and challenges of this work, as well as our future work. It is
diﬃcult to develop a consistent set of criteria for assessing software trust; there-
fore, our view is that trust assessment should be synthetic and drawn on from
diﬀerent perspectives and channels. When collecting and sharing information,
we need to exercise caution to protect both the privacy of individuals and
the objectivity of the data. Additionally, collecting data on the trust of closed
software may be challenging.
Finally, in Section 6, we conclude that current research on software trust is
limited to software quality, ignoring the impact of other hubs or actors in SECO,
e.g., software packages, package managers, or software producers the future research
should expand on this topic.
2 Background of Software Ecosystem
To assist in understanding what aspects of SECO can aﬀect software trust, we
present here an overview of the package management workﬂow, as well as the
concepts used in the study. We sketch the primary entities and stakeholders in the
software ecosystem in Figure 2, along with their simpliﬁed relationships.
2.1 Actors in the Software Ecosystem
Software Product - The deﬁnition of the software product is based on Xu
and Brinkkemper’s concept of a software product. It is deﬁned as “a packaged
conﬁguration of software components or a software-based service, with auxiliary
materials released for and traded in a speciﬁc market” (L. Xu and Brinkkemper,
2007). The deﬁnition emphasizes four elements: “ packaged components” refer to
software, packages, components, libraries, or codes; “ software-based services” refer
to the independent, small piece of functionality accessed through internet, “auxiliary
materials” refer to documentation, user manual or other materials which need to
be implemented with the software or delivery to the end-users , and “ release and
trading” refer the activities that release the software to the market and related
commercial value. To this, we add another independent element -“distribution tools”,
emphasize channels that facilitate distribution downstream of the software supply

--- PDF PAGE 5 ---
A Systematic Literature Review on Trust in the Software Ecosystem 5
Extrinsic 
Trust 
Factors 
- 
SPO
Intrinsic 
Trust 
Factors 
- 
Software 
Product
Product 
Quality 
Structural 
Factors
Form
Develop 
and 
Maintain
Type 
of
Type 
of
include 
facts 
from
From
From
Use
From
End-user
Evidence
End-users' 
Propensity
Stakeholders
Portals
Analysis 
Tools
Trust
Software 
Ecosystem 
Trust
Software 
Trust
Cost
Human
Structural 
Assurance
Popularity
Reputation
Docmentation
Source 
Code
Programming 
Language
Architecture
Dependency
Version
Reliability
Efficiency
Portability
Usability
Functionality
Maintability
Correctness
Testability
Security, 
Vulnerability, 
and 
Attacks
Software 
Development 
Process
Extrinsic 
Trust 
Factors 
- 
Software 
Product
Intrinsic 
Trust 
Factors 
- 
Pakage 
Manager
Dependency 
hell
Security 
vulnerability
Vulnerability 
detection 
and 
prevention
Extrinsic 
Trust 
Factors 
- 
Engineer
Abilities 
and 
Skills
Satisfaction 
and 
Happiness
Software 
Product
Packaged 
Components
Software-based 
Services
Auxiliary 
Materials
Release 
and 
Trading
Processing 
or 
Distribution 
Tools
Software 
Producer
Software 
Producing 
Organizations 
(SPO)
Package 
Maintainers
Software 
Engineers
From
Figure 1 The meta-model can be used as a reading guide for this article, as it mentions all
the relationships between the main entities in our research. For instance, the relationships
between trust types, trust sources, major trust impact factors, hubs, and stakeholders in the
software ecosystem.

--- PDF PAGE 6 ---
6 Fang Hou, Slinger Jansen
chain, meaning the systems or tools that assist in the processing or distribution of
the packaged components that comprise a software product, e.g., package managers.
Component - Based on Software Engineering Body Of Knowledge (SWEBOK),
“a software component is an independent unit, having well-deﬁned interfaces and
dependencies that can be composed and deployed independently” (Bourque and
R.E. Fairley, 2014). The signiﬁcant characteristic of a component is that it can be
reused, can interact with and interact with other objects, and can be combined
with other components to form a system or application. For instance, a menu class
or a button class.
Library - A library is a collection of prewritten functions or data structures that
are organized to perform the same technically essential functions, such as functions
that handle compatibility issues (V. Bauer, Heinemann and Deissenboeck, 2012).
Sometimes a library is referred to as a package in programming language directives,
such as npm, RubyGems, and Maven (Zerouali et al., 2018).
Package - A package is simply a collection that contains software, libraries and
metadata. The metadata includes, for example, the name of the software, a descrip-
tion of its purpose, version number, providers, checksum, and a list of dependencies
for the software or library version. Packages are in general versioned, which fre-
quently adhere to de facto conventions, such as semantic versioning (Hanus, 2018).
A distribution of packages can be considered as being a software ecosystem, with a
collection of interdependent software projects that are developed and maintained
within the same environment (Decan and Mens, 2019).
Package Manager - A package manager provides a privileged, central mechanism
for managing the installation and upgrade of packages on a computer’s operating
system automatically (Cappos et al., 2008a). Sometimes it is referred to as Software
Manager or Application Manager, depending on the context. The preferred term is
Package Manager in programming languages since the installed software is often just
a set of libraries rather than a directly executable application. Package managers
have a major contribution in that they retrieve the speciﬁc versions of the libraries
that are required to build client applications and the libraries they depend on, and
install the required libraries based on their dependencies (Hejderup, Deursen and
Gousios, 2018).
Package Repository - Typically, a package repository is just a web server that
hosts packages and their associated metadata (Cappos et al., 2008b). Package
managers rely on package repositories to install packages and resolve any dependency
requirements.
End-user - A software end-user is an individual or organization that adopts or
intends to adopt a software product into their applications. Usually, the majority
of end-users are software engineers, who are concerned with the functionality of a
package and its integration into their existing projects (Chinthanet et al., 2021).
Alternatively, they could be individuals who lack development experience and rely
on a software component to fulﬁll a speciﬁc requirement. The distinction between
these two types of end-users is not emphasized in our study. However, in our
literature review, we found that most of the interview or survey participants are
experienced software engineers.
Software Producer - The term software producer refers to both software pro-
ducing organizations (SPOs) and software engineers who are involved in its de-
velopment. An SPO is an organization that builds and maintains software with
a view to getting the software created, adopted as widely as possible (S. Jansen

--- PDF PAGE 7 ---
A Systematic Literature Review on Trust in the Software Ecosystem 7
et al., 2012). As software engineers, whether they are employed by an SPO or as
independent contractors, they contribute to the development and maintenance of
software products.
Additionally, package maintainers are a subset of software producers. Pack-
age maintainers are responsible for the development and maintenance of software
packages and their frameworks. They develop and maintain source code, pack-
age builders, and installers, including bug ﬁxes and patch releases. Additionally,
they conﬁgure package builds to ensure that packages can be sourced from the
distribution by extracting the source code from the collection of binaries in the
distribution (Duan et al., 2021).
2.2 Workﬂow of Package Management
In Figure 2 we describe the package management process. When an end-user uses
a package manager to download a library, ﬁrst, the package manager searches
the relevant conﬁguration ﬁle maintained by itself for ﬁles that point to the
location of the repository, e.g., Apple Store or SourceForge, to retrieve the package.
Subsequently, the package manager downloads the relevant packages from the
repository. When the end-user conﬁrms the installation of the selected package, the
package manager installs the relevant packages according to the package dependency
order. After a successful package installation, the package installation information
is stored in the metadata of the local package database and managed by the
package manager to maintain software dependency and version information. End-
users can modify the conﬁguration ﬁle to retrieve packages from other repositories.
Alternatively, they can search and download packages directly from repositories,
such as Github.
A trustworthy program or application cannot depend on untrustworthy com-
ponents or services (Bourque and R.E. Fairley, 2014). To this end, in addition to
the trustworthiness of the software product itself, we should also be concerned
about the reliability of the reusable components, such as components and librar-
ies, as well as the the trustworthiness of the tools that distribute or store them,
such as packages and package managers, and repositories that host these reusable
components. These elements are taken into account in the study of software trust.
3 Research Method
Systematic Literature Review (SLR) is a term used to describe the process of
collecting, reading, analysing, reﬁning, and organizing of data in the existing
literature to provide a comprehensive introduction, elaboration, and evaluation
on a speciﬁc research topic or phenomenon of interest (Keele et al., 2007). We
performed an SLR following the guidelines and steps of (Kitchenham (2004)) to
gain the knowledge in the existing literature on the concepts and inﬂuences of
trust within the software ecosystem domain to understand and reveal the current
relationships between software end-users and software producers. It followed the
outline of the following six activities in this review:
– Deﬁning the research question;

--- PDF PAGE 8 ---
8 Fang Hou, Slinger Jansen
Package ManagerPackageLocal DatabaseRepositoryEnd-userSoftwareLibraryComponentRequest a package’s installationLooking up, downloading, installing, or updating software/libraryVerify digital certification, checksumsMaintainIncludeStore location for packageContain installation informationBe containedBe storedDependencyVersionSoftware ProducerSearch and download packageProvide search and install capabilitiesDevelop and maintainPackage MaintainerMaintain
Figure 2 The model shows the package management process, and it includes relevant stake-
holders, software end-users and package maintainer, essential entities, package manager,
package, local database, and repository.
– Searching for relevant studies;
– Applying inclusion and exclusion criteria;
– Assessing study quality;
– Extracting and analyzing data;
– Coding scheme.
3.1 Research Questions
We construct the following research questions (RQ) to get an overview of software
trust in worldwide SECO:
RQ1: How is the concept of software trust deﬁned in literature?
We deﬁne the concept of software trust as the ﬁrst object of this study. This is
achieved by reviewing and comparing the deﬁnitions of software trust in the
literature and examining the sources, types, and attributions of software trust.
In addition, we extend the deﬁnition of software trust based on the relationships
between software end-users and producers in the software ecosystem.
RQ2: What trust factors do end-user organizations consider when se-
lecting software products?
RQ2 takes into account end-user organizations’ trust factors when making
software product selection decisions, which can be regarded in the following
four sub-research questions. Their impact on software trust may be positive or
negative, in varying degrees.
SubRQ2.1: What trust factors do end-user organizations consider when
selecting software products and versions?
RQ2.1 addresses the factors in software and software packages that aﬀect trust.
These factors are comprehensive in that part of them can originate from the
software and software packages themselves, primarily the quality of the source
code (e.g., integrity, re-usability), known defects and vulnerabilities, packages’
versions and dependencies, and the development process that aﬀects the quality

--- PDF PAGE 9 ---
A Systematic Literature Review on Trust in the Software Ecosystem 9
and security of these source codes; another part of them can come from the
outside world, such as the reputation, popularity, and structural assurance of
the software.
SubRQ2.2: What trust factors do end-user organizations consider when
selecting software package managers?
RQ2.2 is concerned with package managers. Since the major role of package
managers is to manage dependencies in order to ensure that packages are
installed with all dependencies they require, the ability to manage package
dependencies becomes a critical factor aﬀecting the trust in package managers.
Additionally, the trust in package managers is also aﬀected by security risks, such
as consistently detected attacks on metadata, dependencies, and repositories, as
well as known design ﬂaws, such as the lack of eﬀective protection mechanisms
to detect and undo suspicious package installations.
SubRQ2.3: What trust factors do end-user organizations consider when
selecting software producing organizations?
RQ2.3 focuses on how software producers, organizations/ communities build
trust in software and software packages. It focuses primarily on their man-
agement and strategy, such as follow-up of their products, reputation, and
popularity.
SubRQ2.4: What trust factors do end-user organizations consider when
selecting software engineers?
RQ2.4 is concerned with the professionalism of software engineers, especially
their knowledge, experience, and skills, as these factors all contribute to their
ability to develop high-quality software, eﬀectively resolve unexpected problems,
and provide follow-up services. Engineers’ satisfaction and happiness are also
beneﬁcial for developing quality software.
3.2 Search Strategy
Literature review articles are identiﬁed by using search strings from scientiﬁc lib-
raries. First, we deﬁne the object of study, including software and related concepts,
such as software packages, components, and dependencies. Then, in conjunction
with software supply chain processes, we include software management, proven-
ance, and engineers, considering that software trust may be inﬂuenced by project
management and other human factors. Finally, after examining a few deﬁnitions of
trust, we include concepts related or similar to trust based on the understanding of
the nature of trust, such as credibility, reputation, and uncertainty. This resulted
in the following block.
software AND (package OR component OR dependency OR management
OR provenance OR engineer) AND (trust OR credibility OR reputation
OR uncertainty)

--- PDF PAGE 10 ---
10 Fang Hou, Slinger Jansen
Software trust has been studied within software engineering, and related research
can be found in any software engineering-related digital library. To ensure that
no studies were missed, we adopted both manual search, automatic search, and
snowballing technique. We began by manually searching for primary and secondary
studies from the Journal of Systems and Software and Information and Software
Technology. However, it was found that the articles we searched manually were
included in the automatic search results, and they also incorporated a wider range
of articles. Thus, we decided to use automatic search as the main search method,
kept automatic search results from IEEExplore and ScienceDirect as the academic
sources, as well as Google Scholar as a secondary source. Then, the ﬁrst author
obtained the initial list of articles from the search engine and eliminated duplicates.
592 articles were chosen based on their titles, excluding articles that clearly do
not belong to software engineering, for example, we encountered titles containing
community environmental health, ﬁsh, and patients. In the following process, ﬁve
members of our research team applied inclusion and exclusion criteria to each
article, and if all the criteria were met, the article was then included. After that,
the ﬁve researchers scanned the remaining articles to exclude more articles, then
read the articles completely, and performed the quality assessment. Upon reading
the articles in their entirety, we used a snowballing technique to include another
seven articles related to our topic, such as supplements and prior research, ensuring
that we did not miss any extensive versions of the articles. The steps of the search
process are depicted in Figure 3 along with the number of primary and secondary
studies conducted at each step. Note that there is considerable overlap between
articles in diﬀerent digital libraries, resulting in the inclusion of numerous irrelevant
studies.
Figure 3 This ﬁgure indicates the stages of the search process and the number of publications
at each stage.
3.3 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria
The inclusion and exclusion criteria ensure that relevant studies are included, and
studies that do not answer research questions are excluded. If the inclusion criteria
are too broad, poor-quality studies may be included, lowering the overall quality of

--- PDF PAGE 11 ---
A Systematic Literature Review on Trust in the Software Ecosystem 11
the study’s results. If the inclusion criteria are too stringent, the resulting studies
are likely to be small and therefore not generalizable(Meline, 2006).
The given inclusion criteria adopted in this research are:
– Studies published since 1990s;
– Studies that addressed at least one research question;
– When studies reported the same research, only the most recent one was included;
– Studies that appropriately addressed software trust in software ecosystems.
The given exclusion criteria selected in this research are:
– Studies that published in a language other than English;
– Studies that incomplete or only provided literature in the form of abstracts or
presentation slides;
– Studies that concentrated on the development of a single tool for a particular
domain;
– Studies that lacked an adequate description of their objectives or context;
– Studies that were not speciﬁcally related to software engineering or software
ecosystem.
We include books, articles, and a variety of grey literature, e.g., working
papers or dissertations/theses, on software trust, software selection, and software
evaluation. These search results were published after the 1990s, as the Internet
revolutionized the relationship between people, as well as the relationship between
people and software since then. Meanwhile, to avoid results from other disciplines
interfering with this study, we excluded search results that did not pertain to
software engineering or software ecosystems, such as software packages that are
explicitly applied to medical or mathematical sciences. Additionally, we excluded
search results that were either incomplete or lacked detailed descriptions.
3.4 Quality Assessment
The quality assessment guides the interpretation of the ﬁndings (Keele et al., 2007).
In this study, ﬁve researchers were involved in the quality assessment by adopting
the double data extraction method (Buscemi et al., 2006), which means the quality
of each article was assessed by two researchers. We organized discussions to reach a
consensus on quality assessment and read three articles to cross-check and compare
the results to use this mechanism to eliminate any doubts about the selection
process. Our quality assessment focuses on the following questions:
QA1. Does the study address at least one research question?
QA2. Is the study based on research or expert opinion?
QA3. Is there a clear statement of the purpose of the study?
QA4. Was the data collection rigorous?
QA5. Are the ﬁndings of the study clear?
Each member of the research team was then randomly assigned a subset of these
592 articles. The ﬁrst author then conducted a quality assessment of all researchers’
derived results, discovering that 28 articles received varying quality assessment
scores. These 28 articles included six Google Patents, four articles about speciﬁc
software systems, such as mobile applications or enterprise resource planning, and
19 articles about topics other than software trust, such as hardware and internet

--- PDF PAGE 12 ---
12 Fang Hou, Slinger Jansen
trust, or how to estimate maintenance. Following a discussion of these distinctions,
we arrived at 112.
3.5 Data Extraction and Synthesis
The research methods were classiﬁed according to the categories listed in Table
1. The majority of the search results are empirical research. Theories, models, or
frameworks that analyze or evaluate software trust or speciﬁc aspects of software
products contributed most of the trust factors to our study. The remaining factors
came from theoretical studies and exploratory research, e.g., literature review. The
results can be seen in Table 2.
Two data sets have been created to compile the impact factors found in the
literature.
The qualitative data set - The analysis of the literature or its ﬁndings can
be used to deduce the factors aﬀecting software trust. The majority of signiﬁcant
factors are listed in tables or explicit categories, while others were analyzed and
extracted from the literature’s context, ﬁndings, and conclusions.
The quantitative data set - The impact factors for software trust are de-
termined from the models, frameworks, formulas, or test results shown in the
search results. The quantitative data set was composed of works that employed
experimental and statistical data collection methods. Typically, the impact factors
are presented graphically in tables, or as formulas, or they are classiﬁed within the
discussion and context of such literature.
Table 1 Summary of types of the search res-
ults
Research types Total
Empirical Research 83
Theoretical Research 18
Exploratory Research 10
Table 2 Methods of data collection used in
the empirical research
Data collection methods Total
Experiment 42
Case Study 19
Survey/Interview 18
Statistic 4
User study 1
Data synthesis was performed using a frequency analysis technique to aggregate
the extracted data. All included articles were analyzed and extracted. It should be
noted that because some models or criteria have been proposed based on the results
of previous research, several trust factors are duplicated. In the data synthesis, we
still counted and accumulated these trust factors. The reason is that we believe the
trust factors that are repeatedly referred to must be signiﬁcant. Section 4 presents
the synthesis results of the data extracted from the selected studies and answers
the research questions.
3.6 Coding Scheme
To analyse what trust factors end-user organizations consider when selecting
software products, we classiﬁed the impact factors and tried to ﬁnd the relationships

--- PDF PAGE 13 ---
A Systematic Literature Review on Trust in the Software Ecosystem 13
between them. We adopted inductive coding method to analyze the data from
each study. Inductive coding is a type of data analysis in which the researcher
reads and interprets raw textual data to develop concepts, themes, or a process
model based on the data (Chandra and Shang, 2019). In addition, considering our
topic, software trust, used combining Cue Utilization Theory (CUT) to categorize
trust factors (Midha and Palvia, 2012). As CUT is well-known as a framework for
understanding and analyzing the diﬀerent factors that inﬂuence the subject matter
as well as evaluating products. We classiﬁed the cues we selected from the search
results using CUT and divided the impact factors into intrinsic and extrinsic trust
factors for the previously proposed research questions. Intrinsic trust factors have
been used to represent a product’s physical attributes, which refer to source code or
architecture-related attributes or factors, such as technical factors or vulnerabilities;
and extrinsic trust factors have been used to represent external attributes, such as
the product’s reputation, cost, licenses, or capability of the software producer. In
addition, we focus on each actor in the SECO and their relationships, for example,
the reputation or popularity of software producers, which are also categorized in
extrinsic trust factors.
After conducting a systematic review of all impact factors, we assigned them
to our CUT categories as well as to the research questions based on the themes
of each study. We then labeled the codes using the words from both datasets, as
well as their CUT and semantic counterparts and then adapted and reﬁned them.
Additionally, we determined the relative importance of each category by counting
the frequency of the words. If a theme appears frequently, it indicates that it is
signiﬁcant in the research on software trust and may have a signiﬁcant impact on
software trust. In Figure 7 we show the major trust impact factor according to the
word frequency. The coding scheme of trust impact factors is available at this link.
3.7 Biases in the SLR Process
Bias is one of the biggest challenges faced by all researchers. For example, researchers
may be unaware of previous research on a subject or maybe aware but unable
to access the ﬁndings, or the report may be missing critical data points. Thus,
when data are missing, not only does the size of the collected sample decrease, but
the sample’s validity gets smaller as well (Cooper, Lindsay and Patall, 2008). In
this study, we faced two sampling biases: Publication bias refers the problem
that positive results tend to be published more frequently than negative results,
if negative results are not published widely enough, false conclusions could be
attributed to them as true (Keele et al., 2007), and Retrieval bias, Typically,
retrieval bias refers to the risk that the sample used in the synthesis does not
appropriately represent the literature available (Durach, Kembro and Wieland,
2017). In order to mitigate them we did the following:
– Conduct both automatic search and snowballing technique. The automated
search we conducted includes a broader search of articles about software trust,
which is supplemented by snowballing techniques to make the search more
comprehensive in content and scope.
– Obtain articles from published and unpublished articles. In this study, along
with articles from peer-reviewed journals, we included grey literature, such as
pre-prints and post-prints of articles, theses, and dissertations.

--- PDF PAGE 14 ---
14 Fang Hou, Slinger Jansen
4 Results
This section reports our ﬁndings of software trust. Figure 4 illustrates the structure
and relationships of our research questions, thereby contributing to our overall
understanding of our study. It also shows the order we answer the RQs. First, we
provide the deﬁnition and attributes of software trust (RQ1) to understand its
underlying constructs (RQ2), which are software products and software producers.
Following this, we examine the software products and their producers to discover the
factors that may inﬂuence software trust in the SECO during the selection process.
In terms of software products and software producers, we analyze the trust factors
aﬀecting software and software packages (RQ2.1) and package administrators
(RQ2.2), as well as software production organizations (RQ2.3) and engineers
(RQ2.4). Numbers of search results for each research question are given in Table 3.
Figure 4 This model shows the structure of this study, including the relationship between the
research questions.
Table 3 Overview of selected studies per research question. It is possible for a publication to
address more than one research question.
Research Question Total
RQ1:How is the concept of software trust deﬁned in literature? 39
RQ2.1:What trust factors do end-user
organizations consider when selecting
software products and versions?
Software development
governance
40
Software 62
Package and version 7
RQ2.2:What trust factors do end-user organizations consider
when selecting software package managers? 4
RQ2.3:What trust factors do end-user organizations consider
when selecting software producing organizations? 16
RQ2.4:What trust factors do end-user organizations consider
when selecting software engineers? 17

--- PDF PAGE 15 ---
A Systematic Literature Review on Trust in the Software Ecosystem 15
4.1 Concept of Software Trust in Literature
In this subsection, we focus on answering RQ1: How is the concept of software trust
deﬁned in literature?
As we introduced in the introduction section, the common perception of trust
is that it is a belief that the trusted person will actually do what is expected by
trustor. In fact, researchers have interpreted trust diﬀerently in various domains.
In software engineering alone, trust is understood diﬀerently. For example, Garcı´ ea
(2015), Grodzinsky, Miller and Wolf (2011) and Jadhav and Sonar (2011) emphasize
that trust involves risks, defects, and vulnerabilities; Garcı´ ea (2015), Ghapanchi
and Tavana (2015), Nunes et al. (2019) and B. Wang et al. (2019) argue that trust
is viewed as a function of quality of service; Alarcon et al. (2020), Jackson (2009)
and Trˇ cek (2018) state that software trust encompasses trust in software producers.
Table 4 gives the attribution of software trust we collected from the literature. This
table only contains several high frequency attributions, understandings of trust
can be found more in the literature.
Software trust is inherently predictive based on historical data, regardless of its
focus (Jadhav and Sonar, 2011; Kula, German et al., 2015; Jackson, 2009; Alarcon
et al., 2020; Trˇ cek, 2018; Mcknight et al., 2011). According to this interpretation, we
need to pay attention to two aspects: the source of historical data and which aspects
will have an impact on trust, which we are basing our judgments and predictions
about trust. In Section 4.1.1, we discuss the source of interaction histories, in
Section 4.1.2, we explain three aspects that require prediction, i.e., software, human
and structural assurance (the third column in Figure 6).
4.1.1 Source of Software Trust
Software trust is established through the software producer’s and the software’s
characteristics, e.g., how the ﬁrst impressions of the software are, which features of
the software are more important, or which are regarded as low priority or irrelevant.
Sometimes, end-user ﬁrst impression may inﬂuence the ﬁnal choice. For instance,
while a project with spelling errors in the README.md ﬁle does not necessarily
indicate poor quality, an observer may conclude that there is insuﬃcient attention
given to the project by software producers.
As shown in Figure 5, trust is based on either evidence or propensity. Evidence
includes information from the outside world, such as vulnerability reports from
various trusted repositories, for example, Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures
database (CVE) and National Vulnerability Database (NVD); portals for software
reviews, or communities. However, for proprietary products, since such data is
not open to the public, the way for end-users to get relevant information is from
the software or organization portals, or from other users’ experience with the
software. The issue then is that information from the software producers directly
could be one-sided and unveriﬁed, insuﬃciently reﬂecting the reliability of the
software product. In contrast, open-source software products provide evidence in
the form of project data, source code, and bug reports, that are easily accessible
since the repositories, e.g., Github, GitLab, or BitBucket are public and end-users
do not require authorization to access them (Manikas and Hansen, 2013). End-
users can analyze this “raw data” to determine the trust of the product easily.
Additionally, evidence may come from stakeholders, such as internal experts or

--- PDF PAGE 16 ---
16 Fang Hou, Slinger Jansen
Table 4 Attribution of software trust based on the frequency of metrics in the deﬁnitions of
software trust from the literature.
Attribution Deﬁnition Source
Availability Trust is A capability of delivering requested functionality
or services.
Boyes et al.,
2014
Boundary It is important to identify the critical properties and de-
termine what level of conﬁdence is required in addition to
software, physical equipment and humans.
Ghebremedhin,
2012; Jack-
son, 2009
Calculated,
measured,
evaluated
Though software cannot be seen or touched, there must be
an evaluation and measurement of its trustworthiness in
order to ensure the success of the software.
Rosenberg,
Hammer
and Shaw,
1998
Conﬁdence Trustworthiness of software is determined by the degree of
conﬁdence that exists that it meets certain requirements.
Del Bianco
et al., 2011
Credibility A comprehensive qualitative description of the software’s
availability, stability, performance, security, durability, and
supportability under speciﬁed conditions and speciﬁed
time.
Hong,
Chang-hui
and Ben,
2011
Dependability A system is dependable means it can be relied upon or
trusted to perform a certain task. In other word, it only
be justiﬁed if there is evidence that the system has the
capability to function without certain failures.
Jackson,
2009
Evidence, Ob-
servation
Trust refers to an aspect that is based on evidence or
observation. Alternatively, it includes subjective aspects
of an entity’s opinion, such as the presence of human
information that indicates that such incidents will not
occur.
Jackson,
2009
Weakness Trust is the ability of a system to perform its required
functions despite disruptions brought about by natural or
human-made events, hostile attacks by internal or external
parties, and/or system errors caused by hardware and
software issues.
Jadhav and
Sonar, 2011
Human, vendor One trust is about trust in technological artifacts, while
the other is about trusting the vendor’s capability to fulﬁll
the outsourced task and provide quality services.
Goode
et al., 2015
Reputation Reputation complements trust and can be seen as public
perception of trust.
Nunes et
al., 2019
Quality The notion of trust represents the overall system quality
indicator, which should reﬂect the quality of performance
and security, reﬂecting their static and dynamic nature.
Jadhav and
Sonar, 2011
Structural As-
surance
No matter the speciﬁc characteristics of the technology,
there are structural conditions such as contracts, guaran-
tees, support, and other safeguards that should guarantee
the success of the technology in general.
Guo et al.,
2014
Subjectivity Software trust depends on the individual’s past experi-
ences, their biases, their education, and so forth. It is only
through the provision of speciﬁc, detailed guidelines that
this subjective emphasis can be removed.
Guo et al.,
2014
Temporal, Dy-
namicity
Software trust is built continuously and gradually, and
changed over time as more evidence or experience arrives.
More evidence is needed to form a high trust.
Guo et al.,
2014
Transitivity If A trusts B and B trusts C, then it may be concluded that
A trusts C to a certain degree. Transitivity is widely used in
trust-based recommender systems and systems authorized
by certiﬁcate authorities.
Guo et al.,
2014
Transparency A computer is inherently opaque, and one must determine
whether the level of transparency provided is suﬃcient
for the system to be trusted. Therefore stakeholders have
to communicate the truth, keep their commitments , and
consider the interests of each other.
Mercuri,
2005
Uncertainty Trust is essential for almost every situation where either
uncertainty exists, or undesirable outcomes are possible,
meaning that the end-user is exposed to the risk that the
software might fail to fulﬁll its prescribed responsibilities
whether intentionally or unintentionally.
Mcknight
et al., 2011
Vulnerability As a result, end-users accept any vulnerabilities as a part
of the software. An alternative understanding is that a
system is trustworthy when it functions as intended without
unnecessary problems.
Rosenberg,
Hammer
and Shaw,
1998;Jadhav
and Sonar,
2011

--- PDF PAGE 17 ---
A Systematic Literature Review on Trust in the Software Ecosystem 17
EvidencePortalEvaluation, recommendation toolAudit and analysis database, e.g., CVE, NVDQuestions and answers portal, e.g., Stack ExchangeSoftware Producer PortalSoftwareTrust SourcePropensity, e.g., knowledge, experienceToolsData mining tools, e.g., software repository miningResearch PortalProject DataSource codeProject repositoriesBug and event monitoringRecommendation from stakeholders, e.g., end-users, experts
Figure 5 In this model, we outline the main sources of trust, split into evidence, e.g., portals of
software products or software producing organizations, and propensity, e.g., software end-users’
knowledge or experience (Amoroso et al., 1991).
external consultants for advice or evaluation, or experienced end-users or experts,
such as knowledge sharing or questions and answers from stack exchange or stack
overﬂow. Besides, various analytics tools and recommendation systems are sources
of trust. For example, the social network-based recommendation system, which
aims to make personalized recommendations by providing users with the most
relevant data from friends (Krishnan et al., 2008).
The other part is the propensity of software end-users, shaped by their experi-
ence, education (Amoroso et al., 1991), cognition, and rationality. Rationality stems
from the collection of information, nevertheless, there are situations, such as when
faced with a high level of uncertainty or a time constraint, in which rationality
may not lead to the optimal decisions (Evans and Over, 1996). Similarly, in the
presence of factors such as preconceptions, memory, or responsibility, cognition may
inﬂuence the probability of making an incorrect decision by the end-user (Chat-
topadhyay et al., 2020). However, cognition is not always wrong (Decan, Mens
and Constantinou, 2018; Jadhav and Sonar, 2011). For example, a knowledgeable
end-user can determine whether a software package is trustworthy and appropriate
for the current project based on his previous experience. Correspondingly, a person
without any IT background and experience in using software packages cannot be
expected to ﬁnd a trustworthy one. An interesting fact about propensity is that
when end-users are gathering information, they tend to be biased and suspicious of
positive information, perhaps because producers eliminate negative information
on a large scale, causing end-users to distrust them (Tavakolifard and Almeroth,
2012).
Preference is another kind of propensity. All attributes should be weighed
according to stakeholders’ value propositions (J. Li et al., 2012). A software product
may not give the same level of conﬁdence across all functions but still remain
dependable (Jackson, 2009). For example, a bank system may incorrectly calculate
the expiration date of a credit card but must not disclose the customer’s information;
or a cellphone may be unable to change the ringtone, but it can deﬁnitely make
a call. Software trust has boundaries, which encompass the speciﬁc functionality,

--- PDF PAGE 18 ---
18 Fang Hou, Slinger Jansen
timing, user roles, experience, and requirements of the software (Jackson, 2009).
Deﬁning the boundaries of software trust facilitates the focus of the analysis on
speciﬁed areas (Ghebremedhin, 2012), as well as clarifying the priority requirements
and what level of trust. All software trust we discuss should be predicated on the
boundaries of software.
4.1.2 Types of Trust
There is a large volume of publications describing trust. Das and Teng (2001)
describe trust as goodwill trust and competence trust; Sheppard and Tuchin-
sky (1996) deﬁne trust as deterrence-based trust, knowledge-based trust, and
identiﬁcation-based trust; and Sabherwal (1999) speciﬁes trust as calculus-based,
knowledge-based, identiﬁcation-based, and performance-based trust. Till now,
there is still no consensus on the deﬁnition, as trust is diﬀerent in diﬀerent con-
texts (Heiskanen, Newman and Eklin, 2008). When extended to software trust, we
ﬁnd that identiﬁcation-based trust proposed by Sheppard and Tuchinsky (1996)
coincides with traditional social science trust, which is stakeholder-oriented trust,
i.e., trust related to software engineers, organizations, and communities, referred
to software producing organizations in this study. Another one, knowledge-based
trust, is in line with the trust in software artifacts and products, which is based
on knowledge of a technology or product to predict whether it will function as
intended (Alarcon et al., 2020; Jackson, 2009; Jadhav and Sonar, 2011; Kula,
German et al., 2015; Mcknight et al., 2011; Trˇ cek, 2018. The subject of this study is
software trust in the context of SECO, hence, as shown in the Figure 6, we refer to
the classiﬁcation proposed by Sheppard and Tuchinsky (1996). These three types
of trust correspond to trust in software product, structural assurance, and trust
in human, respectively. The correspondence is described in the following section.
We highlight the major factors as boldface text (the fourth column in Figure 6),
sub-factors as italics text (the ﬁfth column in Figure 6).
Knowledge-based Trust - Trust in Software
In Figure 6, trust in software is a kind of knowledge-based trust. Based on
the amount of citations, it primarily arises from the quality, reputation, and
weakness of software products.
Quality is crucial to knowledge-based trust. In software evaluation, it refers to
the functionality, reliability, and helpfulness (Mcknight et al., 2011). Function-
ality is the most basic condition of a trustworthy software product, Moumane,
Idri and Abran (2016) deﬁnes it as the purpose of the system and what it
does. Thus, the software product should provide conﬁdence to the end-users
that this product is what the end-users want. According to IEEE, reliability
refers to the capacity of a system or component to perform speciﬁed functions
for a speciﬁed period of time under speciﬁed conditions (Rosenberg, Hammer
and Shaw, 1998). Most software development managers equate reliability with
correctness, they use frequency of failure, fault tolerance and recoverability to
gauge how reliable a software product is (Berander et al., 2005). Helpfulness
refers to the software product providing adequate and responsive guidance
to users, for instance, if a help function supports users independently ﬁnding
their way in the product (Mcknight et al., 2011; Lankton, McKnight and Tripp,
2015). These three are the most mentioned subfactors in the literature, some

--- PDF PAGE 19 ---
A Systematic Literature Review on Trust in the Software Ecosystem 19
Figure 6 This model depicts the three types of software trust: knowledge-based trust,
deterrence-based trust, and identiﬁcation-based trust (Sabherwal, 1999), as well as the corres-
ponding factors that aﬀect software trust, i.e., software products, structural assurance, and
human.
attributes, such as security, resilience, and safety , are also mentioned in the
literature (Jadhav and Sonar, 2011; Del Bianco et al., 2011; I. K. Lai, Tong and
D. C. Lai, 2011). Although they are not included in the Figure 6, we believe
that they are critical to ensuring software trust as well.
Reputation is the average belief of the relevant audience that you do or do
not possess a particular trait, and it is built gradually over time (Barclay, 2015).
Therefore, reputation is believed by the majority of people. (Nunes et al. (2019))
believe “reputation complements trust, and can be seen as a public perception
of trustworthiness ”, hence, software trust is built on a public foundation,
accumulating a reputation for continuous, high-quality performance (Mailath
and Samuelson, 2001). This performance is not only about the high quality of
the software itself, but also encompasses whether the software producer can
deliver high-quality services.
Weakness refers to risk or uncertainty, anything predictable or unpredictable
that would cause problems or failure of the software or software producer.
Some studies have argued that ‘‘trust is the willingness to take risks under
uncertainty” (Cho, Chan and Adali, 2015), it describes “ the probability of a
particular piece of software to elicit a security failure within a certain time
frame” (Bugiel, Davi and Schulz, 2011). Trust constitutes a distributed, ﬂex-
ible concept that improves the decision-making process without the need for
heavy management, given the various risks and uncertainties from the software
itself or from the software vendor (Moyano, Fernandez-Gago and Lopez, 2016).
These uncertainties can entail requirements, technology, cost, schedule, support
resources, project management, and external attacks. We look at separately
the relationship between risk and software trust and the relationship between
uncertainty and software trust. Risk is the situation where the decision-maker
knows the possible outcome of the decision and the probability of its occur-
rence (Park and Shapira, 2017). Therefore, risk is predictable. Trust comes

--- PDF PAGE 20 ---
20 Fang Hou, Slinger Jansen
with risk, and the greater the risk, the greater the trust required. There is
no doubt that there is risk in using software (Song et al., 2010). Therefore,
we should focus on how software producers control risks and how software
end-users predict risks and understand how software producers control risks.
For example, it is common that expecting zero-defect software is unrealistic,
so instead of being concerned about the presence of vulnerabilities in software,
end users are more interested in when the vulnerabilities found can be resolved
in a timely manner. Uncertainty has been mentioned in several studies on
software trust. The sources of uncertainty are diverse and can be either the
quality of the software or the reputation of the software vendor. Although it
is unpredictable (Park and Shapira, 2017), a large part of this uncertainty
is not caused by the internal problems of the software but by the external
environments in which it is deployed. This is because, a part of the uncertainty
can be exposed during the software testing phase or in the interaction with the
external environment that may produce unexpected disturbances (M¨ uller et al.,
2021), timely ﬁxes and remedies can eliminate this part of the uncertainty.
In addition, modeling and predicting disruptions or impacts from unknown
external environments can be diﬃcult, such as the multi-vector attacks on the
software supply chain. Therefore,more uncertainty comes from these external
environments. However, the signiﬁcance of uncertainty for trust is that if there
was no uncertainty, all information would be objectively available, and end-users
could make judgments independently and with conﬁdence, then trust is not
needed.
Identiﬁcation-based Trust - Trust in Human
In the model in Figure 6, trust in human is a type of identiﬁcation-based trust.
The identiﬁcation-based trust exists because when all stakeholders understand
each other’s intentions and expectations, a connection is built (Sheppard and
Tuchinsky, 1996). Considering the connection between software end-users and
software producers, software producers need to understand end-users need
and their expectations; in turn, end-users need to understand the performance
of software producers. That is, knowledge of software producers’ intentions and
expectations is based on a good understanding of their characteristics, such as
prior performance, experience, skills, and team size. Therefore, it can be seen
that identiﬁcation-based trust is built on knowledge-based trust (Sabherwal,
1999), based on a full understanding between the software producers and
end-users.
Trust in software producers is discussed in the literature by examining whether
they are considered professional and reliable and can produce high-quality
software products and provide quality services (Jadhav and Sonar, 2011). In
addition, how software producers remediate and recover from risks and problems
is also considered to be a factor that has an impact on the reputation of software
producers as it aﬀects the end-user’s willingness to maintain a long-term service
relationship with the software producer (Bennett et al., 2000).
Deterrence-based Trust - Trust in Structural Assurance
Deterrence-based trust is built by the trustee’s fear of the consequences of
breaking a rule, law, or contract. That is, there are licenses, regulations,
or contracts in place in order to prevent someone from harming another,

--- PDF PAGE 21 ---
A Systematic Literature Review on Trust in the Software Ecosystem 21
so the trustor can trust that the trustee will not do anything that could
cause her harm (Sheppard and Tuchinsky, 1996). Therefore, to ensure that all
stakeholders’ interests are not compromised, clear premises or assumptions,
clear responsibilities to be fulﬁlled by stakeholders, and contracts or clauses
with clear penalties are required. When end-users encounter an unknown
software producer or software, the emergence of such assurance protects the
expectations and interests of end-users (Wright, 2010). Here we call them
structural assurance (SA), deﬁned as “ the degree to which consumers believe
that institutional structures like guarantees, regulations, promises, legal recourse,
or other procedures are in place to promote success ” (Sha, 2009).
4.1.3 Deﬁnition of Software Trust
Software ecosystems are complex networks of overlapping supply chains of software,
data, and services. These supply chains have upstream ﬂows from end-users to
software engineers, that for instance contain money and data, and downstream
ﬂows, that for instance contain source code and packages. Software ecosystem
trust constitutes all upstream and downstream trust that is present between the
stakeholders that make up the SECO. This includes, for instance, the trust of
end-users in software engineers to build solutions for their (business) problems,
and the trust of software engineers in software package management systems to
correctly transfer their software to end-users. The concept of software ecosystem
trust is relevant, because without software ecosystem trust, it becomes impossible
for the SECO to ﬂuently deliver value to its stakeholders. Software trust is diﬀerent
from software ecosystem trust. The deﬁnition of software trust is based on the
complex relationships between software end-users and producers in the software
ecosystem. To deﬁne software trust in this context, we refer to the deﬁnitions and
attributions of trust, and deﬁne software trust as follows:
Software trust refers to the willingness of software ecosystem actors to accept
risks based on subjective beliefs. It is essentially an upstream trust in that
actors expect assurance that other actors on top of a common technology
platform can exhibit reliable behavior and provide them valuable software
products. Software products are expected to be able to carry out their
intended functions in the presence of uncertainty, and run consistently and
reliably without interruption.
4.2 Trust Factors of Software Products
This subsection argues RQ2.1 - What trust factors do end-user organizations
consider when selecting software products and versions? As discussed in Section 3.6,
based on CUT, we classify the trust factors as intrinsic trust factors and extrinsic
trust factors. Intrinsic trust factors refer to the features, code, and architecture of the
software product, such as software quality, code quality, and known vulnerabilities.
And extrinsic trust factors refer to attributes bestowed on the software product
by the outside world, such as popularity or reputation, as well as software-based

--- PDF PAGE 22 ---
22 Fang Hou, Slinger Jansen
services and auxiliary materials that need to be delivered to the end-users. We
highlight the major factors as boldface, as we do in the subsequent sections.
4.2.1 Intrinsic Trust Factor
Intrinsic trust factors represent internal physical attributes, rather than being
determined by the environment. The following factors are most frequently discussed
in the literature:
Security, Vulnerability, and Attack Proneness - Security is one of the main
challenges in software. With the continuous emergence of new types of cyber-attacks,
software attacks show a gradual trend of a large-scale, multi-vector, designed to
infect multiple components of the SECO. According to Sonatype, in 2021 the world
witnessed a 650% increase in software supply chain attacks, aimed at exploiting
weaknesses in upstream open source ecosystems (Sonatype, 2021).
Typically, software engineers are not qualiﬁed to spot vulnerabilities in code,
community knowledge, such as publicly accessible vulnerability databases, can
help (Viertel et al., 2019). Literature shows that there are three sources of vul-
nerability data; the ﬁrst is public databases, such as CVE, NVD, or snyk.io; the
second is software producers’ databases, such as Microsoft security bulletins; the
third is specialized databases (Massacci and Nguyen, 2010). Yet, the quality of the
data in the vulnerability database, in particular the timeliness, consistency, and
integrity, is an issue that requires immediate attention (Anwar et al., 2021).
Vulnerabilities are not addressed in a timely manner. The results of a study of
Node Package Manager (npm) showed that most of the reported vulnerabilities
were moderately or highly critical, and while the time required to ﬁx them varied
by severity, ﬁxing them all took a long time. The probability of a vulnerability
being ﬁxed within one month of discovery is 50%, while the probability of a ﬁx after
only 6 months is 74%. Furthermore, more than half of all dependency packages are
aﬀected by vulnerabilities in upstream packages. One interesting aspect is that most
of the aﬀected dependency packages are not automatically ﬁxed with the ﬁx of an
upstream package. The reasons typically are the lack of proper maintenance of the
package or strict dependencies (Decan, Mens and Constantinou, 2018). However,
not all vulnerable packages or libraries will propagate vulnerabilities since not
all code in the package or library will actually be used (Hejderup, Deursen and
Gousios, 2018). In addition, a number of organizations defense approaches are more
oriented towards preventing access to sensitive data or ﬁnding bugs in software
and software packages than malicious packages (Duan et al., 2021).
Unfortunately, there is still no uniform standard to measure software security (H.
Wang et al., 2015). This may be because software security is inﬂuenced by too many
factors, such as environmental factors, complex software supply chains, project
management, or the adoption of programming languages. For the software itself,
the complexity of the requirements, the complexity of the code, the technology
used, and even the skills of the engineers all have an impact on software security,
with the problem being that these factors are hard to quantify. Meanwhile, it is
unrealistic to request software testers to cover all security requirements perfectly.
In addition, diﬀerent stakeholders have diﬀerent perceptions of software security.
Although organizations and governments tend to place a high priority on software
security (H. Wang et al., 2015), typically, software engineers do not it put in the
ﬁrst place (Vargas et al., 2020). In particular, software security requires signiﬁcant

--- PDF PAGE 23 ---
A Systematic Literature Review on Trust in the Software Ecosystem 23
resources to develop, evaluate, and defend, small and medium-sized companies may
not be able to aﬀord this investment.
Quality and Development Process - Factors regarding quality revolve around
the quality characteristics of the software itself and about the activities of the
software during its life cycle. Base on ISO/IEC 9126:2001, software quality has
been deﬁned as “the totality of characteristics of a software product that satisfy
stated or implied needs” (Coallier, 2001), which means the software product and
process should satisfy (1) speciﬁc functional requirements and; (2) end-user needs
or expectations (Miguel, Mauricio and Rodrı´ eguez, 2014).
There are various well-known software quality models. McCall’s Quality Model
proposes 11 factors that describe the external view of the software (user view) and
23 factors that describe the internal view of the software (developer view) (Al-
Badareen et al., 2011). Similarly, Boehm’s Quality Model uses a hierarchical
quality model structure but focuses on a wider range of characteristics, i.e., as-is
utility, maintainability, and portability (Berander et al., 2005). FURPS & FURPS+
are developed by Hewlett-Packard, identifying software quality factors through
functional requirements and non-functional requirements (Khosravi and Gu´ eh´ eneuc,
2004). Dromey’s Quality Model recognizes that quality is assessed diﬀerently for each
product and therefore requires a combination of product characteristics and quality
attributes to determine how each attribute aﬀects quality attributes and identify
software shortcomings (Berander et al., 2005). ISO/IEC 9126:2001 incorporates
these models, it has four parts (quality model, external and internal metrics, and
quality metrics) covering six signiﬁcant areas of software evaluation: functionality,
reliability, eﬃciency, maintainability, portability, and usability (Berander et al.,
2005). However, there are no indications on how to quantify these factors and
subfactors, and this model may reﬂect the perception of software engineers instead
of end-users (Challa et al., 2011; Cˆ ot´ e et al., 2005). It has been replaced by ISO/IEC
25010, which focuses on the characteristics of software internal quality, software
external quality, and software usage quality. The most important point is that
ISO/IEC 25010 proposes trust as “the degree to which a user or other stakeholder
has conﬁdence that a product or system will behave as intended” in quality of
use. Several studies have extended based on these well-known models, such as the
Fuzzy Software Quality Quantiﬁcation Tool (FSQQT), it takes as input several
real-time values of metrics and uses as output quantiﬁed software quality based
on end-user, and engineers’ perspectives. This study shows that end-users care
more about reliability and usability, while engineers focus more on functionality,
eﬃciency, portability, and maintainability (Challa et al., 2011). This is probably
because end-users do not know the software’s code, architecture, or eﬃciency, so
they are more interested in the maturity of the software, fault tolerance, and ease
of operation and learning.
Table 5 shows the number of primary factors and subfactors stated in the models
of McCall’s Model, Boehm’s Quality Model, Dromey’s Quality Model, ISO/IEC
9126:2001, ISO/IEC 25010, FURPS & FURPS+, and FSQQT Model. We found
that reliability is the most critical primary factor in quality models, the following
are eﬃciency, portability, and usability, accuracy, testability, and adaptability are
the most stated subfactors.
Software quality is not accidental; it is achieved through management and must
be assured throughout the entire product life cycle. Reliability is an attribute of
quality, the quality attributes applied at each stage of the SDLC determine the

--- PDF PAGE 24 ---
24 Fang Hou, Slinger Jansen
Table 5 The table shows the primary factors and counts base on McCall’s Model, Boehm’s
Quality Model, Dromey’s Quality Model, ISO/IEC 9126:2001, ISO/IEC 25010, FURPS &
FURPS+, and FSQQT Model.
Primary Factor Total
Reliability 6
Eﬃciency 5
Portability 5
Usability 5
Functionality 4
Maintainability 4
Correctness 2
Testability 2
Subfactor Total
Accuracy 5
Testability 4
Adaptability 4
Interoperability 3
Security 3
Maturity 3
Fault tolerance 3
Operability 3
Installability 3
Replaceability 3
Reusability 3
Consistency 3
Completeness 2
software reliability, the focus is on error prevention, especially the early stages of
the lifecycle (Rosenberg, Hammer and Shaw, 1998). The advantage of the OSS
project is that the project data is public, so there are “many eyeballs” to help
ﬁnd and ﬁx defects (Mohagheghi and Conradi, 2007), thus ensuring more credible
software quality.
It is suggested by models or standards that evidence of software quality or
software trust should cover the information obtained at each stage of the develop-
ment process. For instance, IEEE Std 982.2-1988 indicates the relationship between
software reliability and each life cycle phase, including concept, requirement, design,
implementation, test, installation and checkout, operation and maintenance, and
retirement. In spite of the fact that this standard was published in 1988, it does,
to some extent, reﬂect the information at each stage of the software development
life cycle that inﬂuences the measurement of quality. Additionally, a number of
Capability Maturity Models (CMM) address quality issues from ﬁve maturity levels
of software development processes, i.e., initial level, repeatable level, deﬁned level,
managed level, and optimizing level (Ellison, Nichols and Woody, 2016; Berander
et al., 2005). Repeatable level focuses on project management, the deﬁned level
focuses on engineering process, managed level focuses on product and process
quality, and the optimizing level focuses on continuous improvement. He et al.
(2009) argue that trusted components is aﬀected by the development process,
therefore, the trustworthy proof should be collected through three phases, i.e.,
development phase, submission phase, application phase. Submissions and applica-
tions are primarily concerned with the quality factors in the quality models, for
instance, submission phase includes the proof of functionality, reliability, and usab-
ility, application phase emphasizes the proof of eﬀectivity, security, and eﬃciency.
Similiarly, H. Wang (2011) states that trustworthiness evidence includes three as-
pects, development-stage evidences, delivery-stage evidences, and application-stage
evidences.
Additionally, with the introduction of third-party components, their features
cannot be assessed using traditional quality attributes. Additional concepts of
software quality arise, such as conﬁgurability, customizability, reusability, scalability,

--- PDF PAGE 25 ---
A Systematic Literature Review on Trust in the Software Ecosystem 25
availability, trackability, and compatibility to the quality requirements for software
products produced by traditional software development processes (Miguel, Mauricio
and Rodrı´ eguez, 2014; Chau, 1994; Challa et al., 2011). These concepts emphasize
the need for third-party components to be ﬂexible in design and application,
easy to reuse, change, and extend. The object is not only making the third-party
components reusable, but also making them adapt components to end-users’ systems
and requirements (B. Wang et al., 2019).
Source Code Quality and Architecture - Several researchers calculate soft-
ware quality as the ratio of the total number of defects identiﬁed in a certain period
of time to the total number of code lines (Liu and Iyer, 2007). Thus, it is not hard to
ﬁnd that software quality, especially for open-source software, depends on the qual-
ity source code (Ghebremedhin, 2012) and its attributes, for instance, availability,
understandability, completeness, conciseness, portability, consistency, maintain-
ability, testability, usability, reliability, structuredness, and eﬃciency (Crowston,
Annabi and Howison, 2003; Jadhav and Sonar, 2009; Wheeler, 2011). The most
frequently stated impact aspect concerning source code in the literature is availab-
ility. Reasons abound for this, one of which may be that end-users or downstream
engineers need to inspect or analyze source code in order to determine code quality
as well as software quality.
Programming languages may not directly aﬀect software trust. Still, the experts
believed that 68% percent of the programming language features, for instance,
application domain, platforms, maturity level, and comprehensiveness, have impacts
on the aspects of usability, cost, stability, ownership, guarantee, reputation, support,
and maintainability (Farshidi, S. Jansen and Deldar, 2021). Projects written in
more popular programming languages, are more successful in market penetration
and attracting human resources (Ghapanchi and Tavana, 2015), which indirectly
gives end-users greater conﬁdence to choose their software. In addition, several
aspects need to be considered: (1) the project itself, for instance, as a back-end
server, it is not possible to consider a low performance interpreted language like
Python; (2) support of programming languages; whether in-house developers are
proﬁcient in the language; (3) whether subsequent software packages need to be
purchased or used, and the interfaces.
We try to collect a set of indicators for source code analysis, result can be found
in this link, which are also the most commonly used ﬁelds in various source code
analysis tools. Examples include STRAM (Security, Trust, Resilience, and Agility
Metrics), a system-level trustworthiness metric framework (Cho, S. Xu et al., 2019),
and a framework proposed by Jadhav and Sonar for the evaluation and selection
of software packages (Jadhav and Sonar, 2011), and an updating model based on
Meyer’s ABCDE(Acceptance, Behavior, Constraints, Design, Extension) model of
software component trustworthiness per users feedback (B. Wang et al., 2019). In
forming this set of indicators, we considered, as much as possible, both the goal of
the analysis (i.e., to be able to describe the quality aspects of the software process
and the resulting product) and the availability of metrics in the data (Koch and
Neumann, 2008), assessing process and product evidence (Donohue, Dugan and
Brown, 2005), and product metrics (Gopalakrishna, Spaﬀord and Vitek, 2005).
The architecture comprises “a collection of software and system components,
connections, and constraints; a collection of system stakeholders’ need statements;
and a rationale that demonstrates that the components, connections, and constraints
deﬁne a system that, if implemented, would satisfy the collection of system stake-

--- PDF PAGE 26 ---
26 Fang Hou, Slinger Jansen
holders’ need statements” (Gacek et al., 1995). It holds a great deal of importance
to ensure software quality. It is reported that “engineers will dismiss an unfamil-
iar framework and library if they cannot make it work within an hour” (Haenni
et al., 2014; Haenni et al., 2013). Sometimes, end-users just select a package or
a library to implement a single function instead of a large system or application,
for instance, for brownﬁeld development, the existing software architecture of the
project imposes constraints on the selection of the subsequent software package
or library, the selected package or library must ﬁt into the existing technology
stack of the project (Vargas et al., 2020). In addition, as software packages are
hosted oﬀ-premises, they are diﬃcult to integrate with other systems or software
packages. End-users and software producers should pay additional attention to
the architecture’s integration, scalability, and reliability. Software should have the
ability to remain available to users within a given time window and maintain a
reasonable response time for users even during peak periods (Godse and Mulik,
2009).
Versions and Dependencies - The distribution, installation, and updating of
software packages or components also have an impact on the integrity and reliability
of the software. Distribution requires that the package or component is in the
format provided by the software producer, does not contain any malformations
or corruptions, and that the installation and updates must also be in compliance
with the requirements set forth by the software producer (Catuogno, Galdi and
Persiano, 2017). However, dependencies complicate the software components distri-
bution. Dependencies connect various system components, thus forming a highly
interconnected ecosystem (Hejderup, Deursen and Gousios, 2018). However, the
version of the package it depends on is speciﬁc, hence, a critical activity that must
be carried out at each stage of the SDLC is ensuring the integrity and coherence
of dependencies with deployment tasks, as a failure in this process can result in
disastrous consequences (Catuogno, Galdi and Persiano, 2017).
Considerable security vulnerabilities are caused by aging libraries (Kula, De
Roover et al., 2017), however, it does not mean a new version does not guarantee
bug-free software. In addition, the most recent release may break dependencies
and result in incompatibility (Decan, Mens, Claes et al., 2016). Thus, considerable
organizations choose the stable version over the latest version, they prohibit
updates in case of dependency updates (Pashchenko, Vu and Massacci, 2020). The
dependency hell occurs when several packages have dependencies on the same
package or library, relying on diﬀerent incompatible versions. Dependency hell can
cause a lot of trouble for installation and subsequent maintenance, and can create
security risks (Abate et al., 2011). Still, numerous software engineers are unwilling
to update to newer versions, they downgrade package versions to avoid dependencies
and conﬂicts introduced by the latest versions (Chinthanet et al., 2021), even at
the expense of some software security, because they are overwhelmed by the burden
of maintaining dependencies (Gkortzis, Feitosa and Spinellis, 2021). Therefore,
the requirements for a package or component are: (1) it has to be authentic; (2)
unmodiﬁed; (3) fresh; (4) all required dependencies are properly satisﬁed and
ensure dependency, integrity, and consistency; (5) unauthorized installation is
prohibited (Catuogno, Galdi and Persiano, 2017).

--- PDF PAGE 27 ---
A Systematic Literature Review on Trust in the Software Ecosystem 27
4.2.2 Extrinsic Trust Factors
Extrinsic trust factors refer to the external environment characteristics that inﬂu-
ence software selection. Although the majority of articles discuss intrinsic trust
factors, numerous studies have concluded that end-users prioritize extrinsic trust
factors during the software selection process. In comparison to intrinsic trust factors,
which lack quantitative indicators or detailed data, extrinsic trust factors have a
plethora of data sources on openly accessible portals.
Structural Assurance - In Section 4.1 we underlined that structural assurance is
believed to increase software trust. It includes licenses (e.g., GNU General Public
License 2.0, and Apache License 2.0), contracts, regulations, or other safeguards
(e.g., package promises and legal considerations) (Guo et al., 2014). End-users
may perceive that they are using software in a secure, protected environment as a
result of compliance, policies or laws. Contracts deﬁne the rights and obligations of
the software product, including what each stakeholder expects to accomplish, the
feasibility of the goals and respective roles, the actions that must be taken, as well
as the responsibilities of the software producer and the solutions to anticipated
risks or problems. License is the most important type of structural assurance,
it is based on copyright law and confers certain exclusive rights on the software
producer of a work, including the right to use, reproduce, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sub-licenses, and sell copies (Alspaugh, Asuncion and Scacchi, 2009).
This means that the license restricts the end-user’s ability to use the software.
For instance, the General Public License (GPL) speciﬁes what end users may do
with the software, such as modify the program and distribute the modiﬁed version,
which protects not only the copyright of software producers but also the interests
of both software producers and end-users, thereby reducing the perceived risk
between end-users. Hence, it is reported that end-users are more likely to trust
a licensed product (Osterloh and Rota, 2005; Chinthanet et al., 2021). Besides,
diﬀerent versions of the same software may have diﬀerent license, which end-users
should be aware of during the software selection.
Documentation - Documentation provides the ﬁrst impression to end-users of a
product’s quality (Vargas et al., 2020). It includes the oﬃcial project documentation,
e.g., requirement descriptions, code comments, or testing results (Jackson et al.,
2007), and broader forms of documentation, e.g., documentation translation, user
comments, or discussion in the forums (Ayala et al., 2011; Chau, 1994). A survey of
npm developers initiated by Chinthanet et al. (2021) revealed that 73% of developers
believe that the documentation is highly relevant to package quality assessment,
with the existence of a run example, and the existence of the README.md
ﬁle in the root directory of the package considering the top two documentation
features. Similarly, as part of our previous study, we interviewed 12 participants,
including software engineers, DevOps, architects, and other experts, and ten of them
considered documentation crucial to package selection. Typically, they examine
data structures, the functionality of features, and the package’s compatibility with
the project via documentation, one of them conﬁrmed that packages requiring 2
days of reverse engineering due to unclear documentation would be eliminated (F.
Jansen, S. Jansen and Hou, 2021).
However, there is a problem with both oﬃcial documentation and broader
forms of documentation. In terms of oﬃcial documentation, not all types of doc-
umentation are available to the public due to software producers do not share

--- PDF PAGE 28 ---
28 Fang Hou, Slinger Jansen
project data and source code for free commercial software. In terms of broader
forms of documentation, although the documentation for open-source software
or packages is free and open, much of the technical information and discussion
occurs on mailing lists or forums, making it diﬃcult to collect and maintain valid
information, let alone version control of the documentation.
Popularity - Popularity is deﬁned as the perceived frequency of use of a tool
among members of the community (Xie, Jauhari and Mora, 2021). It represents a
software product’s popularity and is the most straightforward way to determine
how widely used and popular the product is in the public. Popularity can be
measured as the number of likes or downloads of the software product, and the
number of subscribers or views of the information page. Additionally, the number of
dependencies reﬂects the popularity of the software, as a component or library, with
more dependencies means more people are using it and it is more stable (Vargas
et al., 2020).
Reputation - Reputation is an estimation of the nature and values of a person, a
group, an organization, an object, an event, or an activity that is widely shared
in a group (Watson, 2005). It is a judgment about the quality of a product and
future behavior (Farooq et al., 2016). Reputation can be at the software level
or human level. Human-level reputation is discussed in Section 4.4, The focus
here is on the reputation of software. The most direct reputation indicator is
the average software product ratings (Alarcon et al., 2020). The reputation of a
software product may include the number of releases or versions, product history,
and open/closed issues(Alarcon et al., 2020), programming language used, clarity
of comments, number of bugs reported, tests performed, number of versions,
and eﬃcacy (Grachkov and Malyuk, 2020) from users who used the software or
stakeholders who participated in the development or testing. Reputation has a
positive impact on software trust. A good reputation represents a good rating
by a certain size of users over a given period of time, and it represents a lower
risk of choosing the software. Therefore, in similar software quality, the end-user
will choose the software with a higher reputation. However, almost all reputation
information is based on a web source, and one of the signiﬁcant issues with single-
source reputation is the vulnerability to falsiﬁed information (Farooq et al., 2016),
which means that software producers are likely to falsify information or provide only
one-sided information to achieve a higher reputation. Besides, numerous proprietary
product licenses contain clauses prohibiting public criticism of the product without
the software producers’ prior permission (Wheeler, 2011). As a result, it becomes
more diﬃcult for end-users to obtain real feedback from other users, making it
diﬃcult to be able to assess the trustworthiness of proprietary products diﬃcult.
Cost Factors - Although it is widely accepted that cost is associated with software
selection because solution selection frequently involves a trade-oﬀ between quality
and cost (Limam and Boutaba, 2010), they do not believe that cost is associated
with software trust. This is most evident in the growing awareness of software,
particularly open-source software, across a range of industries. However, for several
specialized industries, such as banking, they resisted adopting free/open source
software despite the high cost of customizing and maintaining the software. This is
because they are concerned about the lack of support in the event of a failure or
additional damage to their core systems due to a security breach. Even if they adopt
free/open source software, it is more likely that they will use it for visualization
than for core banking modules.

--- PDF PAGE 29 ---
A Systematic Literature Review on Trust in the Software Ecosystem 29
Many IT companies and open-source platforms currently use Return on invest-
ment (ROI) to evaluate related cost factors, divided into cost of investment, cost
of reuse assets, and rework savings. The cost of the investment includes defense
cost, which refers to the cost of deploying various alternative solutions; decision
cost, which refers to the administrative delays, complexity, and eﬀort incurred in
the decision process; recovery cost, which refers to the costs associated with the
recovery process to back to a normal operating system state; and defense costs
which refers to the cost of defending the system against attackers (Cho, S. Xu et al.,
2019). Defense cost is the critical one, it includes, for instance, license cost, training
cost, installation and implementation cost, maintenance cost, mitigation cost, and
upgrading cost (Jadhav and Sonar, 2009; Jadhav and Sonar, 2011). Cost of reuse
assets and rework savings easily reﬂect whether the software is trustworthy or not,
they measure the cost savings when adopting a trusted library or package, as well
as the rework cost savings due to reduced system errors (Mohagheghi and Conradi,
2007). Usually, the two factors are as diﬃcult to gather before the end-users select
a software or component. The possibility is that they are predicted or calculated
after the software has been in use for a time.
In addition to the ﬁnancial cost, the time cost and potential cost risks that can
impact the cost also need to be considered (Vargas et al., 2020). For instance, the
software will decommission in one year or if the supporting team will be available
in a long time.
4.3 Trust Factors of Software Package Managers
This subsection focuses on addressing RQ2.2: What trust factors do end-user
organizations consider when selecting software package managers?
A package manager is a software tool used to search, install, track, upgrade, and
delete packages on the operating system. It automatically connects to a repository
and downloads the requested and additional packages needed to build the client
application (Cappos et al., 2008a). During the study, we found the current research
on software packages is inadequate. Of the 112 articles, only four are about package
managers, explicitly refer to Table 3 for details. These articles on the impact of
software trust focus on three aspects: (1) dependency hell; (2) Security vulnerability;
(3) Vulnerability Detection in the package manager. All three aspects are related to
the design of the package manager and the vulnerabilities of the package manager,
they are all intrinsic trust factors.
Dependency Hell - As previously stated, installations are currently experiencing
dependency hell, end-users become trapped in a dead-end loop that state-of-the-art
package managers are unable to resolve (Abate et al., 2011). Several researchers
argue that a trusted package manager should avoid the dependency hell by selecting
the right package sources and versions, especially guaranteeing conﬁdentiality,
integrity, freshness, and authenticity of the package and dependency (Catuogno,
Galdi and Persiano, 2017). Currently, attempts have been made, for instance, Nix, a
Linux distribution, installs software packages in a purely functional way to avoid the
dependency hell associated with the traditional upgrading of /usr/bin/perl(Dolstra,
L¨ oh and Pierron, 2010).
Security Vulnerability - Security vulnerability includes two aspects, bugs and
attacks on the metadata and on the repository. In terms of metadata, as explained

--- PDF PAGE 30 ---
30 Fang Hou, Slinger Jansen
Figure 7 This sunburst chart shows the major impact factors for RQ2 in hierarchies. Product
segments are intrinsic trust factors, Software Product, Human, Structural Assurance, and
Cost are extrinsic trust factors. The size of each segment in this sunburst chart indicates the
frequency with which this factor appears in the 112 articles selected.
Section 2, metadata includes the version of a package and a set of dependencies.
An attack on metadata may result in an attacker changing the package’s metadata
to indicate that it depends on a package containing malicious code formulated
by the attacker, or the attacker, introducing unsolvable dependencies or a large
number of virtual dependencies that make the installation impossible (Ayala et al.,
2011). In terms of the repository, if an online repository contains malicious code
when downloading and upgrading packages, it will be imported into the end-user’s
computer through transitive dependencies (Hejderup, Deursen and Gousios, 2018).
For example, GitHub, an online service based on the code version control system,
experienced a malware attack in 2020. The malware identiﬁes the NetBeans project
ﬁle, copies the malicious payload to the project ﬁle, executes the code once the
NetBeans project is built (Gonzalez et al., 2021). Once the GitHub repository is
successfully compromised, the cybercriminals behind the malware have full control
over the target open-source project, ensuring that any new build project cannot
replace the infected project, and malicious build artifacts remain the same.
Vulnerability Detection - The major problem of the package manager design
is the lack of vulnerability detection and protection mechanisms. Vulnerability
detection tools are generally based on known vulnerability disclosure scanning
software components to ﬁnd vulnerabilities (Kaminsky et al., 2002). However, those

--- PDF PAGE 31 ---
A Systematic Literature Review on Trust in the Software Ecosystem 31
tools do not work eﬃciently, detecting a limited number of possible errors based
on predeﬁned rules (Russell et al., 2018). In addition, they also lack oversight of
the packages, as well as a mechanism to undo malicious packages after they were
installed. For example, when an attacker wants to prevent the package manager,
APT or YUM, updating a package from another repository, he refuses to send
data or sends data at a very slow rate to the client’s open connection, but the
package manager lacks monitoring and screening of such situations, does not have
any output to indicate problems or forcibly closes the connection (Ayala et al.,
2011).
4.4 Trust Factors of Software Producing Organizations
This subsection focuses on addressing RQ2.3. What trust factors do end-user
organizations consider when selecting software producing organizations?
If a product is managed by an organization, it will be more popular (Jarczyk et
al., 2014, as it gives the end-users the conﬁdence that this product will be produced
and maintained by professional staﬀ. However, it is often diﬃcult to determine if
an organization is a good self-promoter or a truly reputable organization. Next,
we discuss the role that software producing organizations (SPOs) play in software
trust assessment.
Reputation - Reputation means a publicly recognized judgment about the char-
acter or status of a person or thing (Immonen and Palviainen, 2007). It is an asset
for software producing organizations and gives the organization a competitive edge
over others (Pollock and Williams, 2007; Hoxmeier, 2000). Studies have shown that
software quality has a positive relationship with an SPO’s reputation (Cai and
Zhu, 2016), while an organization’s reputation depends not only on the quality
of the products it produces, but also on other aspects (Vargas et al., 2020), for
instance, the services they provide (Jadhav and Sonar, 2011), end-user’s feedback,
and their rating values (Grachkov and Malyuk, 2020), positive and timely response,
compliance with contracts, and length of experience (Chau, 1994; Vargas et al.,
2020; Jadhav and Sonar, 2009; Challa et al., 2011; Capra et al., 2011). Length of
experience, from the point of view of the SPO, means that the company or organ-
ization has experience in product manufacturing, project management, business
operations, industry, and experienced in-house experts and engineers (Chau, 1994).
This extensive experience results in the company or organization developing higher
quality and trustworthy software, especially when risks and uncertainties come.
They can deal with problems or avoid them more eﬀectively, increasing end-user
conﬁdence in their products and services.
SPO’s Capability - SPO’s capability is the degree of proﬁciency in adapting
skills to a wide range of activities (Goles, Hawk and Kaiser, 2008). It arises from
diﬀerent factors, including technology skills, ﬁrm’s strategy, maturity, and scale.
Technology is undoubtedly the capital of enterprises to achieve success and is the
core competence.
Technology skills emphasize technical knowledge in software project manage-
ment, including programming and system development knowledge, R&D capability,
training, and support. Trustworthy software cannot be developed without pro-
gramming and system development knowledge, which is the physical guarantee
of software production (I. K. Lai, Tong and D. C. Lai, 2011; Cho, S. Xu et al.,

--- PDF PAGE 32 ---
32 Fang Hou, Slinger Jansen
2019; Sarrab and Rehman, 2014). This means that the organization must have
qualiﬁed employees who are proﬁcient in programming, system analysis and design,
project management, and other soft skills in order to deliver software on time, on
quality, and on schedule, and to eﬀectively control and resolve all risks and issues
in the SDLC (Amoroso et al., 1991). It is however not directly measurable, we
need to examine the software products they produce and the services they provide
instead. R&D capability shows whether the company can develop and maintain
current projects and has the potential and innovation to develop new products. It
keeps the organization ahead of the competition by continuously innovating and
introducing new products and services or improving its existing oﬀerings. End-users
prioritize getting training and guidance in the assistance process (Vargas et al.,
2020; Jadhav and Sonar, 2011; Del Bianco et al., 2011; Sarrab and Rehman, 2014),
which include: (1) training and documentation, for example, user manual, tutorials,
troubleshooting guide, and training; (2) maintenance and up-gradation, such as
technical support and consultancy, communication with end-users, on-site demo
and free-trial version, rapid responsiveness, business skills (Jadhav and Sonar, 2009;
Jadhav and Sonar, 2011), management, and operation (Hunter and Walli, 2013);
(3) social network-continued activity; (4) knowledge-sharing user-base (J. Wang
et al., 2015), e.g., Discussion forums, signs of a functional community (Fogel, 2009).
Especially for OSS, a guaranteed, long-term technical support is an important
indicator for selecting an OSS software (Alarcon et al., 2020).
Current software products rely to some extent on third-party components, or
many large IT companies outsource all or part of their projects to third-party
companies, hence, SPO’s technology skills should consider the skills to manage
suppliers. For instance, how to select third-part components, how to manage third-
part producers, or how to maintain the sourcing strategy. A ﬁrm’s strategy includes
the management and strategy of the company, the organizations’ culture, and
the type of industry. Most organizations and end-users consider inﬂuencing the
selection process, but they are not the major factors (Vargas et al., 2020).
Organizational maturity shows that SPOs have the capability to manage
the product well, which is essential to ensure product quality. It is abstract,
including, for instance, content management systems, partnership models, rules,
and regulations (S. Jansen, 2014). Although there is no consensus on how to
measure it, from the perspective of software end-users, formal procedures and
standard security policies will help them evaluate and select software products that
are suited for them (Vargas et al., 2020).
The scale of the organization is presented by, such as how many people write
the code, report problems, and repair defects (Mockus, Fielding and Herbsleb,
2002), number of members contributing (Bogart et al., 2016), and average quality
of members (Challa et al., 2011). The number of engineers working on a project is
the most frequently cited factor (Crowston, Annabi and Howison, 2003; S. Jansen,
2014; Sen, Singh and Borle, 2012; McClean, Greer and Jurek-Loughry, 2020; Midha
and Palvia, 2012; Koch and Neumann, 2008; Walt Scacchi, 2007). These studies
show that engineers positively impact the success of a project, especially for open
source projects. In particular, by modeling both the number of engineers and
subscribers, the results suggest that more engineers in a project may increase the
project activity and thus increase the number of subscribers. Similarly, an increase
in subscribers may aﬀect the number of engineers by attracting new engineers and
contributing new engineers from the subscriber base (Sen, Singh and Borle, 2012).

--- PDF PAGE 33 ---
A Systematic Literature Review on Trust in the Software Ecosystem 33
Hence, along with the program activity, the number of subscribers, the engineer
base is considered by sources of trust information as an indicator of the success
of the OSS project (Subramaniam, Sen and Nelson, 2009), as it is obvious that
they will increase the popularity of the project. Most studies do not explicitly
categorize the engineering base as an attribute of software trust. However, it is
often mentioned in studies measuring project success and studies of software trust
regarding organizations and communities.
4.5 Trust Factors of Engineers
This subsection answers RQ2.4. What trust factors do end-user organizations
consider when selecting software engineers?.
17 selected studies discuss how engineers inﬂuence software trust. The identiﬁed
impact factors are extrinsic trust factors, which are focusing on the following points.
Engineer Abilities and Skills - Engineer abilities and skills are also related to
software trust. Engineering abilities and skills refer to the knowledge and abilities
that an individual engineer or a group of engineers should possess throughout the
product’s lifecycle, they stem from a good working knowledge and experience of
diﬀerent types of operating systems and the ability to learn from others (Sarrab
and Rehman, 2014) These skills and abilities are used to develop and integrate
new and stable modules that meet end-user requirements, which includes, for
instance, deploying and maintaining software, monitoring news posts and messages
in user forums and mailing lists on a regular basis and promptly responding to
bug reports (Norris, 2004). Several researchers believe that they have a signiﬁcant
impact on the quality of the product they create (Mcknight et al., 2011; Norris,
2004; Sarrab and Rehman, 2014; Donohue and Dugan, 2003). Engineer respons-
iveness, in particular, is viewed as critical regardless of whether end-users trust
the software or its output (Gefen and Keil, 1996). If software engineers are unable
to respond promptly to end-users, they will be viewed negatively by end-users
and their products, resulting in distrust. Despite the fact that the response time
is contingent on the availability of engineers in the project and the priority of
end-user problems (Mockus, Fielding and Herbsleb, 2002). In most cases, end-users
are unconcerned with the severity of defects, what matters is that they can be
resolved in a short time. In this context, their soft skills are particularly important.
Numerous researchers disagree on the importance of end-users knowing who
developed the software. According to a set of interviews with 75 engineers that had
been conducted in (Haenni et al., 2013; Haenni et al., 2014), when the end-users
select a component or library, they are not concerned with the engineer’s identity but
with the code’s quality and level of maintenance, e.g., the engineer’s responsibilities
and their response time. The opposite opinion is that the names and numbers
of people working on code development and testing must be public, as reputable
engineers contribute to the code being more reliable and less defective (Madanmohan
and De, 2004). Both views imply that how engineers maintain the project is crucial
for software selection.
Engineers’ Satisfaction and Happiness - Besides that, several researchers
believe that engineers’ satisfaction and happiness with working signiﬁcantly af-
fect the product quality of their products and the trust that end-users place in

--- PDF PAGE 34 ---
34 Fang Hou, Slinger Jansen
them (Crowston, Annabi and Howison, 2003; Walt Scacchi, 2007). Engineer satis-
faction and happiness have a positive eﬀect on software quality (Crowston, Annabi
and Howison, 2003). The most obvious beneﬁt is increased productivity, they will
stay on tasks longer and concentrate more intently, resulting in signiﬁcantly more
eﬃcient coding and problem-solving (Graziotin et al., 2018). As a result, both the
software’s quality and the project’s success will be signiﬁcantly enhanced. Engineer
satisfaction and happiness are highly subjective factors because each individual’s
satisfaction and happiness are unique, they cannot be collected and analyzed via
speciﬁc documents or ﬁelds, as test results are. The feasible method is to conduct
sentiment analysis on engineers’ feelings, for example, through their comments on
project portals or websites, to ascertain their level of satisfaction or happiness.
5 Discussion
5.1 Impact on the Software Selection
The factors discussed in this study may have a positive or negative eﬀect on the
software selection outcome. No factor, on the other hand, can have an absolute
positive or negative eﬀect. For instance, vulnerabilities and attacks appear to be
detrimental to software trust, as their presence has a signiﬁcant impact on the
quality and credibility of software (Cho, S. Xu et al., 2019) and the reputations of
software producers (Vargas et al., 2020). With the advancement of attack techniques
and the expansion of scale and scope, no software can now claim to be secure
enough on its own. However, if the software can employ an eﬀective defense to
ensure a lower number of attacks over time, and if it is capable of employing
more rapid means of resolving the situation following an attack, we can assert
that although vulnerabilities and attacks undermine the software, their eﬀect on
selection and trust is actually positive (Gefen and Keil, 1996). Similarly, factors,
such as the software’s quality, reputation, or the skills of the software producer
can have a positive or negative eﬀect, i.e., if the software is of high quality, has
a positive reputation, and is provided by a competent provider, they will have a
beneﬁcial eﬀect on the software, and vice versa.
The negative or positive impact is determined by how the end-user perceives
those factors for a variety of reasons. For instance, several end-users choose low-
cost software, whereas several industries, such as banking, in order to get enough
resources to develop and maintain the software, choose those with high costs.
There is one situation in which the impact is neither positive nor negative: end-
user propensity, as it aﬀects the end-user to conduct the trust process professionally
and rationally. The resulting eﬀect on decision-making should be beneﬁcial. However,
if the technology of the software evaluation exceeds, such as end-user experience,
it may have no eﬀect on decision-making (Moyano, Fernandez-Gago and Lopez,
2016).
5.2 Validity Consideration
We considered validity from the following points. First, our selection of articles
was inevitably subjective due to bias and understanding of the articles and several

--- PDF PAGE 35 ---
A Systematic Literature Review on Trust in the Software Ecosystem 35
concepts, especially the large number of diﬀerent similar names for the same
concept in the literature, so we could not include all relevant studies included in
this SLR. Second, most of the studies and models that we know focus on software
quality. There is relatively little research on other hubs in the software ecosystem,
stakeholders, and their relationships. The search results are more relevant to FOSS-
based discussions because FOSS provides public access to technical data, whereas
proprietaries have restricted access. Hence, the analysis of the results may not
cover proprietary SECO. Additionally, a considerable number of studies are based
on interviews or questionnaires, which may cause the results they present to be
not generalized. Moreover, most models are not yet widely adopted in the the
open source ecosystem, which means that although the results of several current
studies and models come from questionnaires or interviews or are further validated
by them, they still lack validation and application in real-world projects, which
also further suggests that the results based on questionnaires or interviews may
be problematic in terms of generalizability. Finally, we categorized software trust
as intrinsic trust factor and extrinsic trust factor, and several subfactors, while
this allows for a clariﬁed and focused presentation of the results, we may have
inevitably removed several factors that could not be categorized and may have
overlooked several speciﬁc scenarios that end-users trust.
Next, we will further discuss the role and severity of these factors in the SECO
with diﬀerent stakeholders and experts to ensure that our understanding of these
factors is correct and will continue to focus on and supplement with additional
impact factors.
5.3 Lessons and Research Challenges
Software trust is comprehensive and its factors cover all actors in the software
ecosystem. In this subsection, we identify several challenges that make the research
more complicated. The ﬁrst complicating factor is that end-user’s propensity to
trust is subjective, and even when diﬀerent end-users are given the same information,
the trust they place will be diﬀerent, and this trust can change over time, the
judgment depends on the information they access. Therefore, it is impossible to
assign a ﬁxed priority or weight to the factors.
Second, it is diﬃcult, if not impossible, to ﬁnd a comprehensive set of models to
measure software trust objectively and fairly. The measurement and interpretation
of software trust must be dynamic. Third, the interpretation of trust factors should
be multi-faceted. It may be diﬃcult to obtain or apply project data as the factor
determining trust in closed software, but these data can be used to calculate trust
in open source software.
The digitization of society has provided us many aﬀordances and the penetration
of IT in it should be considered an unprecedented development in history. However,
we are standing at the advent of a new period in history, where societal trust in IT
is dropping at an alarming rate. We can say the hay-day of society’s willingness to
adopt new IT solutions and trust the older ones are over (Hayes, Poel and Steen,
2020). With this problem statement in mind, we have set ourselves a research
challenge.
The ambitious goal that we have set is to raise the accessibility, reliability, and
use of trust data in the worldwide software ecosystem (Hou, Farshidi and S. Jansen,

--- PDF PAGE 36 ---
36 Fang Hou, Slinger Jansen
2021). We envision a future where software can be rapidly and even automatically
assessed in a fair and equal manner, using a shared understanding of trust that is
collaboratively created and maintained. However, before creating such a free and
common infrastructure, several challenges need to be tackled. We deﬁne a set of
research challenges for the future in bold typeface.
The ﬁrst challenge is that we are collecting and sharing software engineer data,
i.e., data that could reveal their identities and break their privacy (Poel, 2020). This
would directly contradict the goals of this project, so we need to ﬁnd mechanisms
for protecting personal data long ethical and legal boundaries , such as
the General Data Protection Regulation (GDRP).
There is an inherent problem with sharing information with a community, as
actors could misjudge or misuse the information. It must be noted that observed
vulnerabilities are not a sign of untrustworthy software and that if these
vulnerabilities are rapidly identiﬁed and eliminated, they actually might be a sign
of trustworthy software. Furthermore, we need to ensure that vulnerabilities can
be shared openly within the community without them falling into the
‘wrong’ hands.
We have performed two preliminary interview studies to assess how software
engineers and end-user organizations would use trust data in their work. These
interview studies showed that while trust facts may be irrefutable, the perception of
trust is a moving target for diﬀerent actors. One actor may be satisﬁed with using
a bleeding-edge version of a software package that updates often, while another
wants an old version of a patched but reliable package. We are currently exploring
if diﬀerent categorizations of trust ratings are necessary , such as “project
evolution speed”, “vulnerability ﬁx time”, and “team liveliness”.
While we respect tools that centrally collect trust data, we believe that trust
data should be part of a zero-trust community. We observe that it isimpossible to
observe correct trust data as one central party objectively and consensus
mechanisms are necessary to observe that a software package version is trustworthy
objectively.
The data collection process itself is challenging. We should be cognizant that a
set of impact factors under security in Figure 7, for instance, will be challenging
to operationalize. Once we have identiﬁed the values (i.e., trust facts) necessary
to collect, we will have to tackle the challenge of the availability of these data.
Data needed to judge the software trust can come from usage data, source code,
build systems, test systems, etc. It will thereby be challenging to judge the
trust of closed software . Furthermore, it is hard, if not impossible, to get
data from closed reputation databases, such as app store ratings. Finally, the
operationalization of the impact factors is a major challenge in this work. We
plan to perform a large-scale survey study with software engineers as an approach
to this problem to identify a minimal collectible set of trust facts useful for software
engineers.
5.4 Future Work
Our near-future works consist roughly of two parts.
First, we plan to launch a software engineer survey based on the out-
comes of this SLR . The developer survey intends to determine a prioritized and

--- PDF PAGE 37 ---
A Systematic Literature Review on Trust in the Software Ecosystem 37
categorized list of trust criteria. Furthermore, we want to use the survey to gauge
and create awareness amongst software engineers about the role of trust in their
software engineering processes.
Secondly, using the list of prioritized trust factors, we develop a tool for
automatically gathering trust scores for diﬀerent trust impact categor-
ies (Hou, Farshidi and S. Jansen, 2021). Software engineers must evaluate the
tool to decide whether it eﬀectively supports them in downloading and depending
on a particular software package. Finally, we aim to store these trust scores in a
distributed ledger, to make trust common for all software engineers. The community
that uses the ledger can contribute openly observable facts to the ledger, to increase
or decrease trust scores for software packages.
6 Conclusion
Although prior work has developed a number of models for quantifying software
trust or other related attributes, only a few have been widely used in real-world
projects. We discovered that the majority of them are oriented around software
quality measurement, ignoring the impact of related actors in SECO on trust, and
omitting the role of attacks and vulnerabilities in measuring trust.
In this paper, we examined the role of trust in SECO by starting with the
selection and measurement of software products. Our goal is to devise a strategy
for resolving the trust erosion issue raised in the introduction, speciﬁcally the harm
caused to SECO’s health by vulnerabilities and attacks. This study adopted a
systematic literature review approach to review trust in SECO from a selected 112
articles. On this basis, we discussed the deﬁnition, types, and sources of software
trust and proposed a deﬁnition for software trust in the context of SECO. Addi-
tionally, we classiﬁed the impact factors on software trust from the standpoints of
software and packages, software package managers, software producers, and soft-
ware end-users. We analyzed the existing literature for relevant impact factors and
counted their frequencies. Software quality, SPO, code & structure, documentation,
and structural assurance are the top ﬁve impact factors. Furthermore, based on
these studies, we compiled a comprehensive table of software trust impact factors
and identiﬁed as many practical metrics as possible for each factor to be measured.
Although the majority of the trust factors we collected are based on empirical
research, and only a few models or metrics are widely used in real-world projects,
they reﬂect, to some extent, the concerns expressed by software engineers or
end-users during the software selection or evaluation process.
According to the literature, software trust serves as the foundation for coopera-
tion between hubs and stakeholders in SECO, while software trust is critical for
cooperation between actors, current research on software trust focuses exclusively
on software and components, particularly software quality. Limited measures of
trust assessment cannot be the ﬁnal word to success, it should be expanded to
include other entities to analyze trust in the software ecosystem in a multi-level,
multi-perspective manner. Next, we will conduct a survey of software engineers
to ascertain their perceptions of software trust in the future, paving the way for
the design of a community-managed infrastructure that serves as a trust layer for
SECO.

--- PDF PAGE 38 ---
38 Fang Hou, Slinger Jansen
Acknowledgements We thank the SecureSECO team for their constructive feedback and
help in the creation of this article. In particular, we thank Donny Groeneveld, Venja Beck, and
Floris Jansen for their diligence in performing their part of the literature review, i.e., ﬁltering,
double-checking, and processing the articles. Furthermore, we thank them for the lengthy and
productive discussions that led to an inter-rater agreement between the SLR team members.
Finally, we thank Hidde Reeskamp and Joost Gadellaa for their excellent comments on the
early versions of this article.
Systematic Literature Review Articles
Abate, Pietro et al. (2011). ‘MPM: a modular package manager’. In: Proceedings of
the 14th international ACM Sigsoft symposium on Component based software
engineering, pp. 179–188.
Alarcon, Gene M et al. (2020). ‘Trust Perceptions of Metadata in Open-Source
Software: The Role of Performance and Reputation’. In: Systems 8.3, p. 28.
Amoroso, Ed et al. (1991). ‘Toward an approach to measuring software trust’. In:
Proceedings. 1991 IEEE Computer Society Symposium on Research in Security
and Privacy. IEEE Computer Society, pp. 198–198.
Ayala, Claudia et al. (2011). ‘Selection of third party software in Oﬀ-The-Shelf-
based software development—An interview study with industrial practitioners’.
In: Journal of Systems and Software 84.4, pp. 620–637.
Bennett, Keith et al. (2000). ‘Service-based software: the future for ﬂexible software’.
In: Proceedings Seventh Asia-Paciﬁc Software Engeering Conference. APSEC
2000. IEEE, pp. 214–221.
Berander, Patrik et al. (2005). ‘Software quality attributes and trade-oﬀs’. In:
Blekinge Institute of Technology 97.98, p. 19.
Bogart, Christopher et al. (2016). ‘How to break an API: cost negotiation and
community values in three software ecosystems’. In: Proceedings of the 2016
24th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Foundations of Software
Engineering, pp. 109–120.
Boyes, HA et al. (2014). ‘Trustworthy Software: lessons fromgoto fail’& Heart-
bleed bugs’. In: 9th IET International Conference on System Safety and Cyber
Security, pp. 1–7.
Bugiel, Sven, Lucas Vincenzo Davi and Steﬀen Schulz (2011). ‘Scalable trust
establishment with software reputation’. In: Proceedings of the sixth ACM
workshop on Scalable trusted computing , pp. 15–24.
Capra, Eugenio et al. (2011). ‘Firms’ involvement in Open Source projects: A
trade-oﬀ between software structural quality and popularity’. In: Journal of
Systems and Software 84.1, pp. 144–161.
Catuogno, Luigi, Clemente Galdi and Giuseppe Persiano (2017). ‘Secure depend-
ency enforcement in package management systems’. In: IEEE Transactions on
Dependable and Secure Computing 17.2, pp. 377–390.
Challa, Jagat Sesh et al. (2011). ‘Integrated software quality evaluation: a fuzzy
multi-criteria approach’. In: Journal of Information Processing Systems 7.3,
pp. 473–518.
Chau, PYC (1994). ‘Selection of packaged software in small businesses’. In:European
Journal of Information Systems 3.4, pp. 292–302.
Cho, Jin-Hee, Kevin Chan and Sibel Adali (2015). ‘A survey on trust modeling’.
In: ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 48.2, pp. 1–40.

--- PDF PAGE 39 ---
A Systematic Literature Review on Trust in the Software Ecosystem 39
Cho, Jin-Hee, Shouhuai Xu et al. (2019). ‘Stram: Measuring the trustworthiness of
computer-based systems’. In: ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 51.6, pp. 1–47.
Crowston, Kevin, Hala Annabi and James Howison (2003). ‘Deﬁning open source
software project success’. In: ICIS 2003 Proceedings, p. 28.
Das, Tushar Kanti and Bing-Sheng Teng (2001). ‘Trust, control, and risk in strategic
alliances: An integrated framework’. In: Organization studies 22.2, pp. 251–283.
Decan, Alexandre, Tom Mens and Eleni Constantinou (2018). ‘On the impact of
security vulnerabilities in the npm package dependency network’. In:Proceedings
of the 15th International Conference on Mining Software Repositories , pp. 181–
191.
Del Bianco, Vieri et al. (2011). ‘A survey on open source software trustworthiness’.
In: IEEE software 28.5, pp. 67–75.
Donohue, Susan K and Joanne Bechta Dugan (2003). ‘Modeling the” good enough to
release” decision using V &V preference structures and Bayesian belief networks’.
In: Annual Reliability and Maintainability Symposium, 2003. IEEE, pp. 568–
573.
Donohue, Susan K, Joanne Bechta Dugan and Charles L Brown (2005). ‘Is My
Software” Good Enough” to Release?- A Probabilistic Assessment’. In: 29th
annual IEEE/NASA Software engineering workshop . IEEE, pp. 5–13.
Duan, Ruian et al. (2021). ‘Towards Measuring Supply Chain Attacks on Package
Managers for Interpreted Languages’. In: Network and Distributed Systems
Security (NDSS) Symposium 2021 .
Ellison, Robert, William Nichols and Carol Woody (2016). ‘Measuring software
assurance’. In: 2016 IEEE 40th Annual Computer Software and Applications
Conference (COMPSAC). Vol. 2. IEEE, pp. 359–364.
Fogel, Karl (2009). How To Run A Successful Free Software Project - Producing
Open Source Software. Scotts Valley, CA: CreateSpace. isbn: 1441437711.
Garcı´ ea, C (2015).Reputation management of an Open Source Software system
based on the trustworthiness of its contributions . Tech. rep. Technical report,
Technical University of Denmark & Universida de Oviedo.
Gefen, David and Mark Keil (1996). ‘DEVELOPER RESPONSIVENESS AND
PERCEIVED USEFULNESS.’ In:Academy of Management Proceedings. Vol. 1996.
Academy of Management Briarcliﬀ Manor, NY 10510, pp. 313–317.
Ghapanchi, Amir Hossein and Madjid Tavana (2015). ‘A longitudinal study of the
impact of open source software project characteristics on positive outcomes’.
In: Information Systems Management 32.4, pp. 285–298.
Ghebremedhin, Abraham Ghebrehiwet (2012). ‘Combining static source code
analysis and threat assessment modeling for testing open source software
security’. PhD thesis. Thesis, Information and Communication Technology,
University of Agder.
Godse, Manish and Shrikant Mulik (2009). ‘An approach for selecting software-as-
a-service (SaaS) product’. In: 2009 IEEE International Conference on Cloud
Computing. IEEE, pp. 155–158.
Goode, Sigi et al. (2015). ‘Rethinking the Role of Security in Client Satisfaction
with Sof tware-as-a-Service (SaaS) Providers’. In: Decision Support Systems
70, pp. 73–85. doi: 10.1016/j.dss.2014.12.005.
Gopalakrishna, Rajeev, E Spaﬀord and Jan Vitek (2005). ‘Vulnerability likelihood:
A probabilistic approach to software assurance’. In: CERIAS, Purdue Univeristy
Tech. Rep 6, p. 2005.

--- PDF PAGE 40 ---
40 Fang Hou, Slinger Jansen
Grachkov, IA and AA Malyuk (2020). ‘Development Problems of Trusted Software
in Critical Information Infrastructure Systems’. In: Advanced Technologies in
Robotics and Intelligent Systems . Springer, pp. 55–62.
Grodzinsky, Frances S, Keith W Miller and Marty J Wolf (2011). ‘Developing
artiﬁcial agents worthy of trust:“Would you buy a used car from this artiﬁcial
agent?”’ In: Ethics and information technology 13.1, pp. 17–27.
Guo, Guibing et al. (2014). ‘From ratings to trust: an empirical study of impli-
cit trust in recommender systems’. In: Proceedings of the 29th annual acm
symposium on applied computing , pp. 248–253.
Haenni, Nicole et al. (2013). ‘Categorizing developer information needs in software
ecosystems’. In: Proceedings of the 2013 international workshop on ecosystem
architectures, pp. 1–5.
— (2014). ‘A quantitative analysis of developer information needs in software
ecosystems’. In: Proceedings of the 2014 European Conference on Software
Architecture Workshops, pp. 1–6.
He, JiuSong et al. (2009). ‘Reference Model of Trustworthy Proof for Trusted
Components’. In: 2009 Second International Conference on Future Information
Technology and Management Engineering. IEEE, pp. 136–139.
Heiskanen, Ari, Mike Newman and Merja Eklin (2008). ‘Control, trust, power, and
the dynamics of information system outsourcing relationships: A process study
of contractual software development’. In: The Journal of Strategic Information
Systems 17.4, pp. 268–286.
Hejderup, Joseph, Arie van Deursen and Georgios Gousios (2018). ‘Software eco-
system call graph for dependency management’. In: 2018 IEEE/ACM 40th
International Conference on Software Engineering: New Ideas and Emerging
Technologies Results (ICSE-NIER). IEEE, pp. 101–104.
Hong, Huang, Wang Chang-hui and Wang Ben (2011). ‘Research on Management
Scheme of Trusted Application Software’. In: 2011 International Conference on
Network Computing and Information Security . Vol. 1. IEEE, pp. 311–315.
Hoxmeier, John A (2000). ‘Software preannouncements and their impact on custom-
ers’ perceptions and vendor reputation’. In: Journal of Management Information
Systems 17.1, pp. 115–139.
Hunter, Paula and Stephen Walli (2013). ‘The Rise and Evolution of the Open
Source Software Foundation’. In: IFOSS L. Rev. 5, p. 31.
Immonen, Anne and Marko Palviainen (2007). ‘Trustworthiness evaluation and
testing of open source components’. In: Seventh International Conference on
Quality Software (QSIC 2007) . IEEE, pp. 316–321.
Jackson, Daniel (2009). ‘A direct path to dependable software’. In: Communications
of the ACM 52.4, pp. 78–88.
Jackson, Daniel et al. (Sept. 2007). Software for dependable systems: Suﬃcient
evidence? National Research Council, pp. 1–148. doi: 10.17226/11923.
Jadhav, Anil S and Rajendra M Sonar (2009). ‘Evaluating and selecting software
packages: A review’. In: Information and software technology 51.3, pp. 555–563.
— (2011). ‘Framework for evaluation and selection of the software packages: A
hybrid knowledge based system approach’. In: Journal of Systems and Software
84.8, pp. 1394–1407.
Jansen, Slinger (2014). ‘Measuring the health of open source software ecosystems:
Beyond the scope of project health’. In: Information and Software Technology
56.11, pp. 1508–1519.

--- PDF PAGE 41 ---
A Systematic Literature Review on Trust in the Software Ecosystem 41
Jarczyk, Oskar et al. (2014). ‘Github projects. quality analysis of open-source
software’. In: International Conference on Social Informatics . Springer, pp. 80–
94.
Koch, Stefan and Christian Neumann (2008). ‘Exploring the Eﬀects of Process
Characteristics on Products Quality in Open Source Software Development’.
In: Journal of Database Management (JDM) 19.2, pp. 31–57.
Kula, Raula Gaikovina, Coen De Roover et al. (Sept. 2017). ‘Modeling library
dependencies and updates in large software repository universes’. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1709.04626.
Kula, Raula Gaikovina, Daniel M German et al. (2015). ‘Trusting a library: A
study of the latency to adopt the latest maven release’. In: 2015 IEEE 22nd
International Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution, and Reengineering
(SANER). IEEE, pp. 520–524.
Lai, Ivan KW, Viny WL Tong and Donny CF Lai (2011). ‘Trust factors inﬂuencing
the adoption of internet-based interorganizational systems’. In: Electronic
Commerce Research and Applications 10.1, pp. 85–93.
Lankton, Nancy K, D Harrison McKnight and John Tripp (2015). ‘Technology,
humanness, and trust: Rethinking trust in technology’. In: Journal of the
Association for Information Systems 16.10, p. 1.
Limam, Noura and Raouf Boutaba (2010). ‘Assessing software service quality and
trustworthiness at selection time’. In:IEEE transactions on software engineering
36.4, pp. 559–574.
Littlewood, Bev (1994). ‘Learning to Live with Uncertainty in our Software’. In:
Proceedings of 1994 IEEE 2nd International Software Metrics Symposium. IEEE,
pp. 2–8.
Liu, Xiang and Bala Iyer (2007). ‘Design architecture, developer networks and
performance of open source software projects’. In: ICIS 2007 Proceedings, p. 90.
Madanmohan, T.R. and Rahul De (Dec. 2004). ‘Notice of Violation of IEEE
Publication Principles Open source reuse in commercial ﬁrms’. In: Software,
IEEE 21, pp. 62–69. doi: 10.1109/MS.2004.45.
McClean, Kelvin, Des Greer and Anna Jurek-Loughry (2020). ‘Social Network Ana-
lysis of Open Source Software: A Review and Categorisation’. In: Information
and Software Technology, p. 106442.
Mcknight, D Harrison et al. (2011). ‘Trust in a speciﬁc technology: An investiga-
tion of its components and measures’. In: ACM Transactions on management
information systems (TMIS) 2.2, pp. 1–25.
Midha, Vishal and Prashant Palvia (2012). ‘Factors aﬀecting the success of Open
Source Software’. In: Journal of Systems and Software 85.4, pp. 895–905.
Mockus, Audris, Roy T Fielding and James D Herbsleb (2002). ‘Two case studies of
open source software development: Apache and Mozilla’. In: ACM Transactions
on Software Engineering and Methodology (TOSEM) 11.3, pp. 309–346.
Mohagheghi, Parastoo and Reidar Conradi (2007). ‘Quality, productivity and
economic beneﬁts of software reuse: a review of industrial studies’. In: Empirical
Software Engineering 12.5, pp. 471–516.
Moyano, Francisco, Carmen Fernandez-Gago and Javier Lopez (2016). ‘A model-
driven approach for engineering trust and reputation into software services’. In:
Journal of Network and Computer Applications 69, pp. 134–151.
Norris, Jeﬀrey S (2004). ‘Mission-critical development with open source software:
Lessons learned’. In: IEEE software 21.1, pp. 42–49.

--- PDF PAGE 42 ---
42 Fang Hou, Slinger Jansen
Nunes, Ingrid et al. (2019). ‘Explaining reputation assessments’. In: International
Journal of Human-Computer Studies 123, pp. 1–17.
Pollock, Neil and Robin Williams (2007). ‘Technology choice and its performance:
Towards a sociology of software package procurement’. In: Information and
Organization 17.3, pp. 131–161.
Rosenberg, Linda, Ted Hammer and Jack Shaw (1998). ‘Software metrics and
reliability’. In: 9th International Symposium—Best Paper Award, page 8p .
Sabherwal, Rajiv (1999). ‘The role of trust in outsourced IS development projects’.
In: Communications of the ACM 42.2, pp. 80–86.
Sarrab, Mohamed and Osama M Hussain Rehman (2014). ‘Empirical study of open
source software selection for adoption, based on software quality characteristics’.
In: Advances in Engineering Software 69, pp. 1–11.
Scacchi, Walt (2007). ‘Free/open source software development: Recent research
results and methods’. In: Advances in Computers 69, pp. 243–295.
Sen, Ravi, Siddhartha S Singh and Sharad Borle (2012). ‘Open source software
success: Measures and analysis’. In: Decision Support Systems 52.2, pp. 364–372.
Sheppard, Blair H and Marla Tuchinsky (1996). ‘Micro-OB and the network
organization’. In: Trust in Organizations: Frontiers of Theory and Research.
Thousand Oaks CA, Sage Publications , pp. 140–65.
Song, Hao et al. (2010). ‘An entropy based approach for software risk assessment:
A perspective of trustworthiness enhancement’. In: The 2nd International
Conference on Software Engineering and Data Mining . IEEE, pp. 575–578.
Trˇ cek, Denis (2018). ‘A brief overview of trust and reputation over various domains’.
In: Trust and Reputation Management Systems , pp. 5–19.
Vargas, Enrique Larios et al. (2020). ‘Selecting third-party libraries: The practi-
tioners’ perspective’. In: CoRR.
Wang, Baohua et al. (2019). ‘Updating model of software component trustworthiness
based on users feedback’. In: IEEE Access 7, pp. 60199–60205.
Wang, Huaimin (2011). ‘TRUSTIE: design of a trustworthy software production
environment’. In: 2011IEEE 10th International Conference on Trust, Security
and Privacy in Computing and Communications . IEEE, pp. 3–4.
Wang, Huaimin et al. (2015). ‘TRUSTIE: a software development platform for
crowdsourcing’. In: Crowdsourcing. Springer, pp. 165–190.
Wang, Jing et al. (2015). ‘Comparative case studies of open source software peer
review practices’. In: Information and Software Technology 67, pp. 1–12.
Wheeler, David A (2011). Why Free-Libre/Open Source Software (FLOSS)? Look
at the Numbers! url: https://dwheeler.com/oss_fs_why.html.
Yan, Zheng (2008). ‘A comprehensive trust model for component software’. In:
Proceedings of the 4th international workshop on Security, privacy and trust in
pervasive and ubiquitous computing , pp. 1–6.
Other Sources
Alspaugh, TA, HU Asuncion and W Scacchi (2009). ‘The role of software licenses in
open architecture ecosystems. 1st Int’l Work. Soft’. In: Ecosystems (IWSECO-
2009), pp. 4–18.

--- PDF PAGE 43 ---
A Systematic Literature Review on Trust in the Software Ecosystem 43
Anwar, Afsah et al. (2021). ‘Cleaning the NVD: Comprehensive quality assessment,
improvements, and analyses’. In: IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure
Computing.
Al-Badareen, Anas Bassam et al. (2011). ‘Software quality models: A comparative
study’. In: International Conference on Software Engineering and Computer
Systems. Springer, pp. 46–55.
Barclay, Pat (2015). ‘Reputation’. In: The handbook of evolutionary psychology ,
pp. 1–19.
Bauer, Paul C (2019). ‘Conceptualizing trust and trustworthiness’. In: Political
Concepts Working Paper Series .
Bauer, Veronika, Lars Heinemann and Florian Deissenboeck (2012). ‘A structured
approach to assess third-party library usage’. In: 2012 28th IEEE International
Conference on Software Maintenance (ICSM) . IEEE, pp. 483–492.
Becerra, Manuel, Randi Lunnan and Lars Huemer (2008). ‘Trustworthiness, risk,
and the transfer of tacit and explicit knowledge between alliance partners’. In:
Journal of Management Studies 45.4, pp. 691–713.
Buscemi, Nina et al. (2006). ‘Single data extraction generated more errors than
double data extraction in systematic reviews’. In: Journal of clinical epidemi-
ology 59.7, pp. 697–703.
Cai, Yuanfeng and Dan Zhu (Aug. 2016). ‘Reputation in an open source software
community: Antecedents and impacts’. In:Decision Support Systems 91, pp. 103–
112. doi: 10.1016/j.dss.2016.08.004.
Cappos, Justin et al. (2008a). ‘A look in the mirror: Attacks on package managers’.
In: Proceedings of the 15th ACM conference on Computer and communications
security, pp. 565–574.
— (2008b). ‘Package management security’. In: University of Arizona Technical
Report, pp. 08–02.
Chandra, Yanto and Liang Shang (2019).Qualitative research using R: A systematic
approach. Springer.
Chattopadhyay, Souti et al. (2020). ‘A tale from the trenches: cognitive biases and
software development’. In: Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE 42nd International
Conference on Software Engineering, pp. 654–665.
Chinthanet, Bodin et al. (2021). ‘What makes a good Node. js package? Investigating
Users, Contributors, and Runnability’. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.12239 .
Coallier, Francois (2001). ‘Software engineering–product quality–part 1: quality
model’. In: International Organization for Standardization: Geneva, Switzerland .
Cooper, Harris M, James L Lindsay and Erika A Patall (2008). ‘Research synthesis
and meta-analysis’. In: Applied Methods, p. 344.
Cˆ ot´ e, Marc-Alexis et al. (2005). ‘The evolution path for industrial software quality
evaluation methods applying ISO/IEC 9126: 2001 quality model: example of
MITRE’s SQAE method’. In: Software Quality Journal 13.1, pp. 17–30.
Decan, Alexandre and Tom Mens (2019). ‘What do package dependencies tell us
about semantic versioning?’ In: IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering .
Decan, Alexandre, Tom Mens, Ma¨ elick Claes et al. (2016). ‘When GitHub meets
CRAN: An analysis of inter-repository package dependency problems’. In: 2016
IEEE 23rd International Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution, and
Reengineering (SANER). Vol. 1. IEEE, pp. 493–504. doi: 10.1109/SANER.2016.
12.

--- PDF PAGE 44 ---
44 Fang Hou, Slinger Jansen
Dolstra, Eelco, Andres L¨ oh and Nicolas Pierron (2010). ‘NixOS: A purely functional
Linux distribution’. In: Journal of Functional Programming 20.5-6, pp. 577–615.
Durach, Christian, Joakim Kembro and Andreas Wieland (Oct. 2017). ‘A New
Paradigm for Systematic Literature Reviews in Supply Chain Management’.
In: Journal of Supply Chain Management 53. doi: 10.1111/jscm.12145.
Evans, Jonathan St BT and David E Over (1996). ‘Rationality in the selection
task: Epistemic utility versus uncertainty reduction’. In: Psychological Review
103.2, pp. 356–363.
Farooq, Umar et al. (2016). ‘A multi source product reputation model’. In: Com-
puters in Industry 83, pp. 55–67.
Farshidi, Siamak, Slinger Jansen and Mahdi Deldar (2021). ‘A decision model for
programming language ecosystem selection: Seven industry case studies’. In:
Information and Software Technology, p. 106640.
Gacek, Cristina et al. (1995). ‘On the deﬁnition of software system architecture’. In:
Proceedings of the First International Workshop on Architectures for Software
Systems. Seattle, WA, pp. 85–94.
Gkortzis, Antonios, Daniel Feitosa and Diomidis Spinellis (2021). ‘Software re-
use cuts both ways: An empirical analysis of its relationship with security
vulnerabilities’. In: Journal of Systems and Software 172, p. 110653. issn: 0164-
1212. doi: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jss . 2020 . 110653. url: https :
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0164121220301199.
Goles, Tim, Stephen Hawk and Kate M Kaiser (2008). ‘Information technology
workforce skills: The software and IT services provider perspective’. In: Inform-
ation Systems Frontiers 10.2, pp. 179–194. doi: 10.1007/s10796-008-9072-9 .
Gonzalez, Danielle et al. (2021). ‘Anomalicious: Automated Detection of Anomalous
and Potentially Malicious Commits on GitHub’. In: 2021 IEEE/ACM 43rd
International Conference on Software Engineering: Software Engineering in
Practice (ICSE-SEIP). IEEE, pp. 258–267.
Graziotin, Daniel et al. (2018). ‘What happens when software developers are (un)
happy’. In: Journal of Systems and Software 140, pp. 32–47. doi: 10.1016/j.
jss.2018.02.041.
Hanus, Michael (2018). ‘Semantic versioning checking in a declarative package
manager’. In: Technical Communications of the 33rd International Conference
on Logic Programming (ICLP 2017) . Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum fuer
Informatik.
Hayes, Paul, Ibo van de Poel and Marc Steen (2020). ‘Algorithms and values in
justice and security’. In: AI & SOCIETY 35, pp. 1–23. doi: 10.1007/s00146-
019-00932-9.
Heyns, Marita and Sebastiaan Rothmann (2015). ‘Dimensionality of trust: An
analysis of the relations between propensity, trustworthiness and trust’. In: SA
Journal of Industrial Psychology 41.1, pp. 01–12.
Hou, Fang, Siamak Farshidi and Slinger Jansen (2021). ‘TrustSECO: A Distributed
Infrastructure for Providing Trust in the Software Ecosystem’. In: International
Conference on Advanced Information Systems Engineering . Springer, pp. 121–
133.
Jansen, Floris, Slinger Jansen and Fang Hou (2021). ‘TrustSECO: An Interview
Survey into Software Trust’. In: arXiv:2101.06138. url: https://arxiv.org/
pdf/2101.06138.pdf.

--- PDF PAGE 45 ---
A Systematic Literature Review on Trust in the Software Ecosystem 45
Jansen, Slinger et al. (2012). ‘Shades of gray: Opening up a software producing
organization with the open software enterprise model’. In: Journal of Systems
and Software 85.7, pp. 1495–1510.
Kaminsky, Dan et al. (2002). Hack Prooﬁng Your Network. Syngress.
Keele, Staﬀs et al. (2007). Guidelines for performing systematic literature reviews
in software engineering. Tech. rep. Technical report, Ver. 2.3 EBSE Technical
Report. EBSE.
Khosravi, Khashayar and Yann-Ga¨ el Gu´ eh´ eneuc (2004). ‘A quality model for design
patterns’. In: German Industry Standard .
Kitchenham, Barbara (2004). ‘Procedures for performing systematic reviews’. In:
Keele, UK, Keele University 33.2004, pp. 1–26.
Krishnan, Vinod et al. (2008). ‘Who predicts better? Results from an online study
comparing humans and an online recommender system’. In: Proceedings of the
2008 ACM conference on Recommender systems , pp. 211–218.
Li, Jianping et al. (2012). ‘An integrated risk measurement and optimization model
for trustworthy software process management’. In: Information Sciences 191,
pp. 47–60.
Li, Xiaozhou et al. (2021). ‘Exploring factors and measures to select open source
software’. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.09977 .
Mailath, George J and Larry Samuelson (2001). ‘Who wants a good reputation?’
In: The Review of Economic Studies 68.2, pp. 415–441.
Manikas, Konstantinos and Klaus Marius Hansen (2013). ‘Software ecosystems–
A systematic literature review’. In: Journal of Systems and Software 86.5,
pp. 1294–1306.
Massacci, Fabio and Viet Hung Nguyen (2010). ‘Which is the right source for
vulnerability studies? an empirical analysis on mozilla ﬁrefox’. In: Proceedings
of the 6th International Workshop on Security Measurements and Metrics ,
pp. 1–8.
Meline, Timothy (2006). ‘Selecting studies for systemic review: Inclusion and
exclusion criteria’. In: Contemporary issues in communication science and
disorders 33.Spring, pp. 21–27.
Mercuri, Rebecca T (2005). ‘Trusting in transparency’. In: Communications of the
ACM 48.5, pp. 15–19.
Miguel, Jos´ e P, David Mauricio and Glen Rodrı´ eguez (2014). ‘A review of software
quality models for the evaluation of software products’. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1412.2977.
Moumane, Karima, Ali Idri and Alain Abran (2016). ‘Usability evaluation of mobile
applications using ISO 9241 and ISO 25062 standards’. In: SpringerPlus 5.1,
pp. 1–15.
M¨ uller, Marcel et al. (2021). ‘Trust Mining: Analyzing Trust in Collaborative
Business Processes’. In: IEEE Access 9, pp. 65044–65065.
Osterloh, Margit and Sandra Rota (Mar. 2005). ‘Trust and Community in Open
Source Software Production’. In: Analyse & Kritik, Zeitschrift f¨ ur Sozialtheorien
26. doi: 10.1515/auk-2004-0115.
Park, K. Francis and Zur Shapira (2017). Risk and Uncertainty . London: Palgrave
Macmillan UK, pp. 1–7. doi: 10.1057/978-1-349-94848-2_250-1 .
Pashchenko, Ivan, Duc-Ly Vu and Fabio Massacci (2020). ‘A qualitative study of
dependency management and its security implications’. In: Proceedings of the

--- PDF PAGE 46 ---
46 Fang Hou, Slinger Jansen
2020 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security ,
pp. 1513–1531.
Russell, Rebecca et al. (2018). ‘Automated vulnerability detection in source code
using deep representation learning’. In: 2018 17th IEEE international conference
on machine learning and applications (ICMLA) . IEEE, pp. 757–762.
Sha, Wei (2009). ‘Types of structural assurance and their relationships with trusting
intentions in business-to-consumer e-commerce’. In: Electronic Markets 19.1,
pp. 43–54.
Sonatype (2021). 2021 state of the software supply chain . url: https : / / www .
sonatype.com/hubfs/Q3%202021-State%20of%20the%20Software%20Supply%
20Chain-Report/SSSC-Report-2021_0913_PM_2.pdf?hsLang=en-us .
Subramaniam, Chandrasekar, Ravi Sen and Matthew L Nelson (2009). ‘Determin-
ants of open source software project success: A longitudinal study’. In: Decision
Support Systems 46.2, pp. 576–585. doi: 10.1016/j.dss.2008.10.005.
Tavakolifard, Mozhgan and Kevin C Almeroth (2012). ‘A taxonomy to express open
challenges in trust and reputation systems’. In: Journal of Communications
7.7, pp. 538–551.
Viertel, Fabien Patrick et al. (2019). ‘Detecting Security Vulnerabilities using Clone
Detection and Community Knowledge.’ In: SEKE, pp. 245–324.
Watson, Andrew (2005). ‘Reputation in open source software’. In: Northeastern
University, Boston, MA, USA, working paper 1.
Wright, Stephen (2010). ‘Trust and trustworthiness’. In: Philosophia 38.3, pp. 615–
627.
Xie, Chengshu, Shaurya Jauhari and Antonio Mora (2021). ‘Popularity and per-
formance of bioinformatics software: the case of gene set analysis’. In: BMC
bioinformatics 22.1, pp. 1–16.
Xu, Lai and Sjaak Brinkkemper (2007). ‘Concepts of product software’. In:European
Journal of Information Systems 16.5, pp. 531–541.
Zerouali, Ahmed et al. (2018). ‘An empirical analysis of technical lag in npm package
dependencies’. In: International Conference on Software Reuse. Springer, pp. 95–
110.