--- PDF PAGE 1 ---
International Journal on Software Tools for Technology Transfer
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10009-026-00840-6
EXPLANATION PARADIGMS LEVERAGING ANALYTIC INTUITION
Regular
Dynamic calibration of trust and trustworthiness in
AI-enabled systems
Magnus Liebherr1 · Ellen Enkel1 · Eﬃe L.-C. Law 2 · Mohammad Reza Mousavi3 · Matteo Sammartino4 ·
Philipp Sieberg5
Accepted: 3 February 2026
© The Author(s) 2026
Abstract
Trust is a multi-faceted phenomenon traditionally studied in human relations and more recently in human-machine interactions.
In the context of AI-enabled systems, trust is about the belief of the user that in a given scenario the system is going to be
helpful and safe. The system-side counterpart to trust is trustworthiness. When trust and trustworthiness are aligned with each
other, there is calibrated trust. Trust, trustworthiness, and calibrated trust are all dynamic phenomena, evolving throughout
the history and evolution of user beliefs, systems, and their interaction. In this paper, we review the basic concepts of trust,
trustworthiness and calibrated trust and provide deﬁnitions for them. We discuss their various metrics used in the literature,
and the causes that may aﬀect their dynamics, particularly in the context of AI-enabled systems. We discuss the implications
of the discussed concepts for various types of stakeholders and suggest some challenges for future research.
Keywords Trust · Trustworthiness · Calibrated trust · AI-enabled systems
1 Introduction
Trust [38, 51, 97, 103] is a user-centred multi-faceted no-
tion, which has been traditionally studied in social sci-
ences in human-human interactions. With the advent of
human-machine interactions and more recently autonomous
and AI-enabled systems trust has gained renewed interest
[41, 57, 91]. This has been particularly driven by the in-
creasing deployment of AI in high-stakes domains such as
healthcare, ﬁnance, and autonomous driving, where trust di-
rectly impacts adoption, interaction quality, and safety. As AI
systems take on more autonomous and decision-critical roles,
ensuring appropriate levels of trust has become a central con-
cern. In this context, many recent studies have focussed on
deﬁning [ 91] and measuring [6, 17, 82, 120] trust in human-
machine interactions. Users’ trust in machines is not always
justiﬁed [ 28]: under-trust in a system that is not trustworthy
can lead to reduced beneﬁt for users, and over-trust can lead
to harm. Calibrated trust [ 28] happens when trust of users
and trustworthiness of systems [ 18, 71, 76, 111] meet. All
these notions are parametric to users (personas and groups)
and scenarios in which the system is used.
In this paper, we provide an overview of existing results,
open challenges, potential solutions regarding trust and trust-
worthiness in data-driven AI-enabled systems. A common
feature of many such systems is that there is typically lit-
tle speciﬁcation available and hence, establishing trustwor-
thiness and calibrating trust are signiﬁcant challenges. Our
target audience is researchers, particularly those starting a re-
search career in Trust (worthiness) for AI, and practitioners
using such systems. We present the deﬁnitions and results in
such a way that they are also accessible for practitioners and
✉M. Liebherr
magnus.liebherr@uni-due.de
E. Enkel
ellen.enkel@uni-due.de
E.L.-C. Law
lai-chong.law@durham.ac.uk
M.R. Mousavi
mohammad.mousavi@kcl.ac.uk
M. Sammartino
matteo.sammartino@rhul.ac.uk
P. Sieberg
philipp.sieberg@schotteautomotive.de
1 University of Duisburg-Essen, Duisburg, Germany
2 Durham University, Durham, UK
3 King’s College London, London, UK
4 Royal Holloway, University of London, London, UK
5 Schotte Automotive Gmbh & Co.KG, Hattingen, Germany
Springer

--- PDF PAGE 2 ---
M. Liebherr et al.
policy makers. For this audience, we present rigorous deﬁ-
nitions and an overview of available metrics and causes; we
also reﬂect on the possible applications and consequences,
and open issues for future research.
The contributions of this paper can be summarized as
follows:
– An overview of deﬁnitions, assessment models, and fac-
tors of trust, trustworthiness and their calibration.
– A framework, based on the provided deﬁnitions, account-
ing for the dynamic interaction among trust, trustworthi-
ness and their interactions.
– A reﬂection on the implication of these issues. We derive
recommendations for system developers, policy makers,
users and companies on how to deal with the levels of
trust/trustworthiness.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In
Sect. 2, we review the diﬀerent facets and deﬁnitions of trust,
trustworthiness and calibrated trust and produce our deﬁni-
tions. In Sect. 3, we present the state of the art in assessing
these concepts and the open challenges involved in their as-
sessment. In Sect. 4, we discuss the factors that may have a
positive or negative causal inﬂuence on trust and trustworthi-
ness (and hence, their calibration) and discuss the dynamics
of trust and trustworthiness in this context. Section 5 dis-
cusses the ongoing work embodying the implication of this
research, e.g., in terms of standards and guidelines. Section6
concludes the paper and presents an overview of the future
road-map. We provide a glossary of terms as anAppendix to
help our readers navigate through the wealth of terminology
and concepts.
2 Deﬁnitions
2.1 Trust
Deﬁning trust Trust stands as a foundational element
within interpersonal relationships and is generally deﬁned
as “the willingness of a party to be vulnerable to the actions
of another party based on the expectation that the other will
perform a particular action important to the trustor, irrespec-
tive of the ability to monitor or control that other party”
[97]. Mayer et al.’s (1995) model expands on this deﬁnition
by identifying three key dimensions that shape the trustor’s
perception of trustworthiness, namely ability, benevolence,
and integrity. This perception of trustworthiness inﬂuences
trust, which in turn impacts the trustor’s willingness to take
risks. The extent to which trust translates into risk-taking
is moderated by perceived risk, meaning that trust only be-
comes relevant in situations where vulnerability exists. Ad-
ditionally, trustor’s propensity—a general tendency to trust
others based on personality or past experiences—acts as an
antecedent, shaping initial trust levels before direct interac-
tions with the trustee occur [97]. In addition to considering
risk as a moderator, other perspectives on trust place sig-
niﬁcantly greater emphasis on perceived risk as a central
component. [38, 51, 103]. The perception of risk has to do
with the epistemic state of each user. Although risk is inher-
ent in trust, it does not negate the value of trust. Rather, it
is the willingness to trust despite potential risks that makes
trust a powerful and transformative force in interpersonal re-
lationships, group dynamics, civic engagement and society
as a whole [122]. However, trust is not limited to the interper-
sonal domain. It also describes the way people interact with
technology. In particular, the ﬁeld of trust in AI has garnered
signiﬁcant attention in recent times [41, 78, 148].
To our current understanding, it is evident that interper-
sonal trust and trust in AI-based systems entail reliance on
an external entity; however, the underpinnings and dynamics
of trust exhibit notable distinctions between human interac-
tions and engagement with AI-based systems, particularly
concerning the dynamics of trust calibration with respect
to the trustworthiness of the AI-enabled system. Currently,
multiple competing deﬁnitions of trust in AI-based systems
exist, and consensus on a speciﬁc deﬁnition has not been
reached. In accordance with previous work in the area of
trust and new technologies/AI applications [41, 57, 91], we
deﬁne trust in AI-based systems as follows.
Trust is deﬁned as the user’s (u) epistemic state that
the system (s) is going to behave (b) as expected in a
scenario (r) characterized by a certain level of risk and
uncertainty.
Much like in interpersonal relationships, trust is about
the state of people’s minds and it signiﬁcantly inﬂuences
people’s readiness to depend on AI-based systems. Below
we list some of the factors contributing to trust, with a focus
on trust in AI-based systems.
Cognitive trust vs. emotional trust Trust can be ground-
ed in both aﬀect, involving emotional aspects, and ra-
tional thinking, encompassing cognitive evaluations [ 98].
[97] hinted at the potential emergence of an emotional con-
nection in a trusting relationship. However, their model did
not fully incorporate emotion. Instead, the inﬂuential factors
have been construed through a cognitive lens, wherein trust
is logically assessed by the trusting party based on trusting
beliefs [89, 100]. Cognitive trust is rooted in logical rea-
soning and evidence, involving assessments that individuals
make about the reliability, competence, and predictability
of another party [126]. This evaluation extends beyond hu-
man interactions, recognizing trust as a key factor in human
relations with non-humans [57, 115]. Researchers studying
cognitive trust in AI describe it by the users’ willingness
Springer

--- PDF PAGE 3 ---
Dynamic calibration of trust and trustworthiness in AI-enabled systems
to act on factual information or advice and their perception
of the technology’s helpfulness, competence, or usefulness
[47, 57, 91]. It’s important to acknowledge that cognitive
trust might also be inﬂuenced by factors like emotions and
mood, and that emotional trust may mediate users’ decisions
to adopt a speciﬁc technology [ 83]. Although we know that
emotions are the primary determinant of trusting behavior,
the concept of emotional trust is under-explored and deserve
further research in the context of human interactions with
technology [57, 91]. Generally, emotional trust is described
by the sense of security individuals experience within emo-
tional connections with others [41, 70, 93]. In the utilization
of AI-based systems, tangibility has proven to be of sig-
niﬁcant importance, as well as the empathy and compassion
exhibited by the AI towards users [42, 95, 148]. [42], through
their review of literature on human trust in AI, identiﬁed three
forms of AI representations (robotic, virtual, and embedded)
and their corresponding paths of cognitive and emotional
trust. Overall, due to the information asymmetry between an
AI system and its users, building cognitive trust proves to
be challenging without a thorough understanding of how the
system operates. Consequently, users often rely on emotional
trust [87].
Theoretical models for trust in AI A particularly rel-
evant extension of trust models to human-machine inter-
actions was introduced by [ 90] and later reﬁned by [ 91].
Their work translated Mayer et al.’s [97] interpersonal trust
dimensions—ability, benevolence, and integrity—into the
automation context, framing trust as a user’s perception of
a system’s performance (ability), intent (benevolence), and
predictability (integrity/reliability). This adaptation laid the
groundwork for understanding trust in AI, as it emphasizes
how users develop expectations about system behavior based
on cognitive evaluations of these dimensions. Building on
these insights, trust has been recognized as a pivotal fac-
tor shaping users’ behavioral intentions towards the utiliza-
tion of AI-based systems, consequently impacting adoption
and diﬀusion in diverse domains [ 41, 148]. In a recent re-
view, encompassing diverse industrial areas, trust is eluci-
dated as a substantial and aﬃrmative predictor of intention,
willingness, and usage behavior related to AI [78]. The im-
portance of trust becomes also evident in both classic and
modiﬁed iterations of key theories on new technology adop-
tion (also applicable to the domain of AI-based systems), by
including trust indirectly (Theory of Reasoned Action; The-
ory of Planned Behavior; Technology Acceptance Model) or
directly (modiﬁed versions of the Technology Acceptance
Model) within the models [5, 27, 37, 39]. These frameworks
also underscore the dynamic nature of trust in technology
adoption processes, a concept that has been explicitly ex-
plored in additional theories. Dynamic trust models have
been reported in various contexts such as the Internet of
things [ 138] algorithmic advice [ 26, 57] or B2C Cross-
Border E-Commerce [ 29]. The prevailing consensus con-
solidates trust as an emergent phenomenon rather than a
static state [146]. In Explainable AI (XAI) a notional view
of how trust could morph has been proposed, showing that
users start cautiously or skeptically but become more trusting
when provided with an eﬀective initial explanation, leading
to a state of justiﬁed trust; however, continued interaction
with the XAI system may lead to instances of automation
surprise [58].
2.2 Trustworthiness
Deﬁning trustworthiness Trustworthiness has been used
in various ﬁelds of social sciences such as Philosophy
[18, 71, 79], Psychology [19, 123], Political Economy [50],
and outside social sciences in Neuroscience [33] and Com-
puter Science and Engineering [ 76, 111]. It is noteworthy
that trustworthiness is an under-researched concept, particu-
larly when compared with trust [50]. The semantics of trust-
worthiness varies across diﬀerent ﬁelds and there are even
debates about how to deﬁne it within a ﬁeld of study. For ex-
ample, Hardin [50] deﬁnes trustworthiness as the “capacity
to judge one’s interest in fulﬁlling the trust”. In much of the
social sciences literature, trustworthiness is deﬁned in terms
of perceived trust. An important aspect of many earlier deﬁ-
nitions of trustworthiness is its contextualization in terms of
the subject (the assessor of trustworthiness), the object (the
trustee), and the task (the scenario in which the interaction
is supposed to happen) [18, 71]. We would like to provide a
deﬁnition of trustworthiness that can be formalized and can
provide a basis for quantitative measurement on the system
and its properties. This will further enable quantifying the
dynamic calibration between trust (using the metrics sur-
veyed before) and trustworthiness (through the forthcoming
deﬁnition). It is worth noting that trustworthiness is dynamic
and subject to change during the system life cycle due to the
continuous changes (e.g., due to changes and repair and also
due to ageing of sensors and hardware). As a consequence,
we deﬁne trustworthiness to be a property of the object of
trust, given a speciﬁcation of requirements provided by the
user, as well as the scenario in which trustworthiness is de-
ﬁned. It is therefore inspired by the earlier contextualization
of trustworthiness in earlier deﬁnitions [71, 79].
Trustworthiness: We call a system (s) trustworthy in a
scenario (r), when it satisﬁes the user’s (u) requirements
(req
s) for the scenario. A system is trustworthy when it is
trustworthy in all scenarios within its operational design
domain.
Principles of trustworthiness Several organizations
have proposed principles for trustworthy AI, including ma-
jor tech companies such as Google, OpenAI, Microsoft, and
Springer

--- PDF PAGE 4 ---
M. Liebherr et al.
IBM. These principles coalesce around the key requirements
set out by the EU Commission in 2019 [55]:
1. Human agency and oversight: AI should support human
agency, safeguard fundamental rights of users and include
oversight mechanisms.
2. Technical robustness and safety: AI systems must exhibit
resilience, safety and security. Additionally, they should
prioritize accuracy, reliability, and reproducibility. Con-
tingency plans should be in place.
3. Privacy and data governance: AI systems should guaran-
tee privacy and data protection, ensure the quality and
integrity of data, and support data access protocols.
4. Transparency: AI systems should be properly documented
to allow for traceability, with technical and decision-
making processes that are explainable. Users should be
made aware of the systems’ capabilities and limitations.
5. Diversity, non-discrimination and fairness: AI systems
should avoid unfair bias, be accessible, and engage perti-
nent stakeholders at every stage of their life cycle.
6. Societal and environmental sustainability: AI systems
should contribute to the well-being of individuals, pri-
oritize sustainability and environmental friendliness, and
undergo thorough assessments for their societal impact.
7. Accountability: AI systems should incorporate mecha-
nisms to guarantee responsibility and accountability. The
algorithms, data, and design processes should facilitate
auditability, with established measures for redress.
The EU deﬁnition is not the ﬁnal word on deﬁning trust-
worthiness, but it gives a comprehensive template for assess-
ing trustworthiness on an abstract level. The principles put
forward by the EU can further be used as metrics to char-
acterize the requirements for diﬀerent scenarios in diﬀerent
application domains. Moreover, such requirements can be
turned into formal contracts between AI system providers
and users to enforce the trustworthiness of the system [67].
There are published critiques of this deﬁnition [ 86, 130,
132], some of which note that the EU guidelines are pri-
marily based on ethical rather than legal principles, making
their implementation challenging in speciﬁc contexts such
as corporate governance, where harmonization with relevant
regulations and governance principles is necessary [53]. Al-
though other frameworks exist, there is considerable consen-
sus on the key principles (see [62, pag.13] for a comparison
table).
2.3 Calibrated trust
Deﬁning calibration Trust and trustworthiness are sup-
posed to mirror each other: trust is the belief of the user
about the system matching their expectations, while trust-
worthiness is the property of the system that satisﬁes the re-
quirements aligned with user needs, which, in turn, capture
Fig. 1 Trust calibration [28] p. 462
users’ expectations. Trust is a personal and user-speciﬁc no-
tion, while trustworthiness, in our deﬁnition, is objective and
generalizable to a group, community or society [127, 128].
Calibrated trust, deﬁned below, is when for a given user, the
levels of trust and trustworthiness match, i.e., trust is placed
on a system that is trustworthy in the given scenario:
Calibrated trust: Trust of a user (u) in a system (s) in
a scenario (r) is called calibrated when it matches the
actual level of trustworthiness of the system for this sce-
nario. Trust in a system is calibrated when it is calibrated
for all users and all scenarios.
Calibration of trust is a dynamic process; typically the
user builds an instantaneous trust when confronted by an AI-
based system. Instantaneous trust may be informed by prior
knowledge, by the guarantor of the system and the guarantees
provided, as well as other cognitive and emotional factors
brieﬂy discussed in Sect. 2.1 and elaborated in Sect.4.B o t h
instantaneous trust and the dynamic changes of trust can
lead to overtrust and distrust in AI-based systems. Below
we brieﬂy discuss the issues of overtrust and distrust. See
Fig. 1 [28] for a depiction of how calibration is determined
by actual and perceived trustworthiness.
Under-trust/distrust Under-trust in AI technology can
have multifaceted consequences, manifesting in various ways
[28]. Firstly, the failure to harness the full potential of Trust-
worthy Autonomous Systems (TAS) is a signiﬁcant draw-
back. Underestimating or hesitating to rely on the capabili-
ties of AI systems leads to missed opportunities for enhanced
eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness. Additionally, under-trust can re-
sult in suboptimal solutions or performance [28]. Doubting
the capabilities of AI technology may lead to conservative
Springer

--- PDF PAGE 5 ---
Dynamic calibration of trust and trustworthiness in AI-enabled systems
decision-making, preventing the realization of optimal out-
comes that could be achieved through a more conﬁdent in-
tegration of AI tools. Communication breakdowns can also
arise as a consequence of under-trust. When humans lack
conﬁdence in AI systems, eﬀective communication chan-
nels may be hindered, impeding the seamless collabora-
tion between human operators and autonomous technologies
[92, 112]. Moreover, under-trust contributes to an increased
workload on both human operators and TAS [ 36]. Human
operators may feel compelled to overcompensate for per-
ceived deﬁciencies in AI, leading to heavier cognitive load.
Simultaneously, AI systems may not be utilized to their full
potential, resulting in a suboptimal distribution of tasks and
responsibilities. Lastly, under-trust can lead to a state of dis-
use or micromanagement. Human operators, due to a lack
of trust in AI, may either refrain from using the technology
altogether or micromanage its functions, undermining the
purpose of employing autonomous systems for eﬃciency
and autonomy [28, 36].
Over-trust Over-trust in AI presents serious challenges,
often culminating in harmful outcomes. This unwarranted
conﬁdence in AI systems can be particularly perilous when
the technology is not infallible or fully capable of perform-
ing a given task [11]. The danger lies in relying excessively
on AI without recognizing its limitations, potentially leading
to critical errors or misinterpretations [28, 42]. In instances
where over-trust prevails, there is a concerning lack of guid-
ance and control mechanisms. Users may neglect to provide
adequate oversight or interventions, assuming that AI is en-
tirely reliable [135]. This absence of vigilant monitoring can
exacerbate the risks associated with over-trust, as it fails
to account for unexpected variables or evolving scenarios.
Consequently, over-trust not only ampliﬁes the potential for
disastrous outcomes but also highlights the need for robust
guidance and control measures to ensure the responsible and
eﬀective deployment of AI technologies in various contexts
[42, 135].
Trust in AI-powered agents undergoes continuous cali-
bration over time, particularly in prolonged collaborations
between humans and agents [28]. User trust adapts dynami-
cally based on the performance of the agent. Trust increases
with positive interaction (matching the mental model of the
user with the interaction with the AI based system) and
trust can decrease when the expectation from the user is
not matched with by the system (e.g. because the system
has the wrong mental model of the user, overestimating the
user’s trust). In [143] comprehensive review of trust calibra-
tions for automated systems, distinct patterns related to trust
ﬂuctuations and recovery, or resilience, were identiﬁed. No-
tably, some studies revealed that users were more responsive
to declines in the agent’s reliability than to improvements.
The decline in trust was more pronounced than the increase,
Table 1 Summary of concepts, deﬁnitions, and discussed topics for:
trust, trustworthiness, and calibrated trust
Concept Deﬁnition Discussed topics
Trust We deﬁne trust in AI-based
systems as the users (u)
epistemic state that the system
(s) is going to behave (b) as
expected in a scenario (r)
characterized by a certain level
of risk and uncertainty.
Cognitive and
emotional trust,
Expectations,
Theories of trust.
Trustworthiness We call a system (s)
trustworthy in a scenario (r),
when it satisﬁes the user’s (u)
requirements for the scenario.
As y s t e mi st r u s t w o r t h yw h e n
it is trustworthy in all
scenarios within its
operational design domain.
Agency and
oversight,
Privacy and data
governance,
Robustness and
safety, Fairness,
Sustainability,
Accountability.
Calibrated trust Trust of a user (u) in a system
(s) in a scenario (r) is called
calibrated when it matches the
actual level of trustworthiness
of the system for this scenario.
Trust in a system is calibrated
when it is calibrated for all
users and all scenarios.
Calibrated trust,
instantaneous
trust, overtrust,
distrust.
despite comparable changes in reliability in either direction
[142]. Users were inclined to trust the agent even more after
recovering from minor and brief reliability lapses, but not
for signiﬁcant and short ones [ 94]. Additionally, the nature
of the error leading to reliability changes could signiﬁcantly
impact trust calibration; for example, false alarms were ob-
served to diminish trust more than misses [ 21]. However,
these intriguing phenomena have primarily been analysed
from cognitive rather than aﬀective processes (i.e. cognitive
rather than emotional trust), as [ 143] reported that only a
few studies have explored the emotion-trust relationship in
the context of automated systems [35].
2.4 Summary
In this section, we provided three formal deﬁnitions for the
three concepts of trust, trustworthiness, and calibrated trust.
All three deﬁnitions are parameterized in terms of a user (u),
a system (s), and a scenario (r). Trust is about the user’s state
(e.g., beliefs and emotions) concerning the system in a given
scenario. Trustworthiness is about systems’ properties with
respect to users’ requirements in a given scenario. Calibra-
tion is about the conformance of the earlier two notions. For
each of the three concepts, we provided some aspects of the
concept discussed in earlier research to motivate and contex-
tualize our deﬁnitions. Table 1 summarizes the concepts, as
well as the deﬁnitions, and aspects of each concept discussed
in this section.
Springer

--- PDF PAGE 6 ---
M. Liebherr et al.
3 Assessment
3.1 Measures of trust
The varied conceptualizations and subsequent operational-
izations of trust have given rise to a multitude of trust mea-
sures [6, 17, 82, 120]. They can be categorized as either
direct or indirect methods. Direct assessment involves self-
report/subjective measures, while indirect evaluation utilizes
behavioral/performance-based as well as physiological mea-
sures.
Self-report/subjective measures These measures entail
individuals providing information regarding their thoughts,
feelings, attitudes, or behaviors. They rely on individuals’
self-disclosure and are typically obtained through surveys,
questionnaires, interviews, or other means where individuals
report on their own experiences or perceptions. Self-report
measures are most commonly used to assess human trust due
to the ease of use and implementation in tasks or contexts [69,
84, 96, 125, 145]. We provide a summary of such measures
in Table 2.
Utilizing a text analysis approach, [ 6] identiﬁed diﬀer-
ences and similarities across the most used trust question-
naires, subsequently providing guidelines for its selection. In
the context of AI, the following two speciﬁc questionnaires
are most commonly used:
– Trust in Artiﬁcial Intelligent Agents Questionnaire [ 8];
and
– TXAI Questionnaire [ 59].
In addition to employing speciﬁc questionnaires, general
trust assessments or modiﬁed versions adapted from other
contexts are also utilized to measure trust in AI. Furthermore,
studies on trust in AI-based systems frequently incorporate
custom measures, such as non-validated scales or individ-
ual items. In Table 2, we provide a concise overview of the
self-report/subjective measures of trust.
Behavioral/performance-based measures These mea-
sures assess trust based on observable actions, responses, or
behaviors exhibited by individuals in a given context. These
measures focus on tangible and external manifestations of
trust, providing insights into how individuals interact with or
rely on a particular entity, system, or situation. Examples of
behavioral measures in the context of trust might include:
– Compliance and Agreement Rate [ 136]
– Decision Time [ 149]
– Reliance [ 114]
– Response Time [ 85]
The determination of the parameter used as a behavior-
related measure for evaluating trust depends on the system or
AI technologies considered. For instance, in the integration
of AI-based technologies in driving, reaction time serves as
a valuable metric for gaining insight into trust in the system
[85]; however, it oﬀers limited insights or may not be rel-
evant to conversational AI applications. Unlike self-report
measures that rely on individuals’ subjective perceptions,
behavioral measures oﬀer an objective and tangible way to
assess trust by examining actual behaviors and actions in
real-world or simulated scenarios. These measures are par-
ticularly valuable for understanding trust dynamics in situ-
ations where individuals may not accurately or completely
express their trust through self-reporting.
Physiological measures These measures capture bio-
logical responses within the human body as indicators of
trust in a given situation. Certain physiological reactions
such as changes in heart rate, skin conductance or brain ac-
tivity, which reﬂect emotional and cognitive states, are used
to draw conclusions about changes in trust. Typical measures
are:
– Heart rate variability [ 139] - Electrodermal activity or
galvanic skin response [81]
– Neural measures [ 44, 56, 72]
– Eye gaze tracking [ 43, 52]
Physiological measures enhance our understanding of un-
derlying processes associated with trust (see Table 3). In
order to draw conclusions, it is necessary to link physio-
logical measures to context. Just as behavioral measures are
selected, the choice of a metric is contingent upon the spe-
ciﬁc AI technology under consideration, taking into account
factors such as the environment (e.g., natural environment),
the situation (e.g., any kind of movement included), and in-
dividual aspects (e.g., clinical history).
To date, several systematic literature reviews on human
trust in technologies provide further insights into related
measures [4, 6, 12, 17, 82, 120]; integrating such reviews
can chart a landscape of existing methods and tools for mea-
suring trust in AI-based systems. In the future, it is crucial to
consolidate the substantial variability in metrics employed
for evaluating human trust in AI and to establish consensus
on the adoption of standardized methods [42]. Furthermore,
when employing trust measures in the realm of new technolo-
gies and AI systems, it is essential to consider the various
phases of usage. Subjective measures are most eﬀectively
utilized in the pre- and post-technology use phases, as inte-
grating them into the actual usage phase is diﬃcult and can
potentially disrupt individuals. In contrast, behavioral mea-
sures can be solely applied during the actual usage phase,
as they oﬀer data derived from interactions with the system
or technology. Physiological measures are also commonly
employed during the usage phase. However, to continuously
track the progression of trust from pre-use to post-use and
Springer

--- PDF PAGE 7 ---
Dynamic calibration of trust and trustworthiness in AI-enabled systems
Table 2 Summary of self-reported / subjective measure of trust
Questionnaire Number of
items
Subscales Likert-
scale
Example Context Psychometric
characteristics
Trust Between
People and
Automation [69]
12 - 1-7 “The system is
deceptive.”
Automated system Reliability ↑[69, 120]
Reliability of scale
structure ↓[145]
Human-computer
trust questionnaire
[96]
25 Perceived Reliability,
Perceived Technical
Competence, Perceived
Understandability,
Faith, Personal
Attachment
1-7 “The system
performs reliably.”
subjective measure
of “cognition
based” and
“aﬀective-based”
trust
Reliability, Validity↑
[96], Reliability↑,
Construct validity↓
[30]
TiA scale [84] 19 Reliability/Compe-
tence,
Understanding/Pre-
dictability, Familiarity,
Intention of
Developers, Propensity
to Trust, Trust in
Automation
1-5 “The system works
reliably.”
Reliability, validity↑
[84, 120]
Trust Perception
Scale for
Human-Robot
Interactions [125]
40 (and 14
item
sub-scale)
- 0%-100% “What percent of
the time will this
robot be
responsible?”
Human-Robot-
Interaction
Reliability↑,v a l i d i t y↓
[120]
Propensity to Trust
Scale [102]
6 - 1-5 “I usually trust
machines until
there is a reason
not to.”
Propensity to trust,
not speciﬁc
technology
Reliability↑[102]
HCTM [45] 12 - 1-5 “I believe that
there could be
negative
consequences
when using (—).”
Reliability↑[45]
[99] 16 Trusting beliefs,
Trusting intention
1-7 “I can always rely
on
LegalAdvice.com
in a tough legal
situation.”
Reliability↑[99]
TAIA (Trust in
Artiﬁcial Intelligent
Agents; [8])
12 Predictability,
Consistency, Utility,
Faith, Dependability,
Understanding
1-7 Not included Reliability, Validity
and internal
consistency↑[8]
TXAI [59] 8 - 1-5 “I am conﬁdent in
the [tool]. I feel
that it works well.”
XAI Reliability ↑[59]
gain insights into speciﬁc situations, such as initial encoun-
ters with the technology, physiological measures can provide
a more detailed understanding (Fig.2).
3.2 Trustworthiness
It follows from our deﬁnition (see Sect. 2.2) that trustwor-
thiness can be put on a formal ground, for a given set of
scenarios, if the expected behaviors of the system in those
scenarios are formalized. The level of conﬁdence and the pre-
cision of the measured trustworthiness are then proportional
to the details made available in the requirement speciﬁcation
for the given set of scenarios.
A number of assessment frameworks are available. The
FAIE-H toolkit designed by the Open Roboethics Institute
[113] aims to perform ethics assessment of healthcare AI
projects, mainly focusing on the development and deploy-
ment stages. The Assessment List for Trustworthy AI (AL-
Springer

--- PDF PAGE 8 ---
M. Liebherr et al.
Table 3 Summary of physiological measures of trust
Parameter Explanations
Heart rate
variability
Describes the ﬂuctuations in the time interval
between successive heartbeats and can be
indicative of the autonomic nervous system’s
activity, providing insights into emotional
responses and potential trust-related states [139]
Electrodermal
activity
This is measured using electrodes in contact with
the skin, detecting changes in ionic activity
inﬂuenced by sweat [16, 25]. Changes can signify
emotional arousal, potentially reﬂecting trust or
anxiety [81]
Neural measures Neural measures involve the examination of brain
activity patterns to gain insights into cognitive
processes related to trust. Techniques such as
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI),
functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS), or
electroencephalography (EEG) are employed to
capture neural responses. These measures provide
direct information about how the brain responds
to trust-related stimuli, oﬀering valuable data on
the cognitive aspects of trust perception. Neural
measures enhance our understanding of the
underlying neurological processes associated with
trust in various contexts, including human
interactions with technology or AI [44, 56, 72].
Eye gaze tracking Involves monitoring the direction and duration of
an individual’s eye movements. By analyzing
where a person directs their gaze, researchers can
gain insights into visual attention patterns and
cognitive processing related to trust. For instance,
prolonged gaze at certain stimuli may indicate
heightened interest or trust, while quick shifts in
gaze may suggest uncertainty or scepticism
[43, 52].
Fig. 2 Allocation of measurement methods according to their primary
temporal use in the process of interaction with AI systems
TAI) [54] is an online tool that prompts users with a set of
questions related to the dimensions of trustworthiness. The
outcomes are subsequently visualized in a spider diagram.
A recent example is the Z-Inspection toolkit [151], a holistic
approach which aims to orchestrate assessments from a team
of multi-disciplinary experts, and can be applied at any stage
of the AI system lifetime. Due to this multidisciplinary and
multifaceted nature of trustworthiness, in the remainder of
this section, we provide an overview of some of the key as-
pects of trustworthiness, as exempliﬁed in the EU Guideline
for Trustworthy AI [55], and provide respective metrics to
measure them.
Human oversight and agency The degree of human
agency and oversight in relation to an AI system is in direct
correlation with the perceived level of risk associated with
the scenario. This relationship has been categorized in [55]
into three distinct paradigms: human-in-the-loop, human-on-
the-loop, and human-in-command. Other works [7] empha-
size the need for a more nuanced understanding of these dif-
ferent levels of human interaction with AI systems. We may
quantify the appropriate level of agency/oversight by carry-
ing out a risk assessment in diﬀerent scenarios, using one of
the frameworks recently proposed (e.g., [110]), and compar-
ing the result with the expected level of agency/oversight in
each scenario. It is widely acknowledged that higher-risk AI
necessitates more rigorous oversight to ensure responsible
development, deployment, and operation.
Technical robustness / safety Assessing technical ro-
bustness and safety can be achieved by evaluating compliance
with established guidelines, such as those outlined by the UK
NCSC [109], and adherence to standards such as ISO 10218
[64], and the IEEE P7009 standard for fail-safe design of
autonomous and semi-autonomous systems [63]. More rig-
orous approaches within formal methods oﬀer greater ability
to quantify properties. Exact (complete) approaches for deep
neural networks include:
– Encoding natural networks and safety properties as con-
straints satisfaction problems. This approach ensures that
the system operates within certain safety bounds [34, 75];
and
– Assessing resilience against deliberate attempts to manip-
ulate its behavior, known as adversarial attacks [61, 108].
There are approaches to ﬁnd “nearest” (with respect to
speciﬁc metrics) adversarial examples [15, 133].
To mitigate complexity, incomplete approaches are avail-
able, based on abstract interpretation [ 40, 129], simulation
[147], and approximation [141].
Although less studied, approaches for other models exist,
such as support vector machines [ 119], and for identifying
nearest adversarial examples in decision tree ensembles [20,
73].
Privacy and data governance Data ownership, account-
ability, and management are crucial aspects of data gover-
nance [80]. Assessing them involves evaluating the clarity
and comprehensiveness of roles and responsibilities, and
Springer

--- PDF PAGE 9 ---
Dynamic calibration of trust and trustworthiness in AI-enabled systems
Table 4 Summary of measures of privacy as a part of trustworthiness
metrics: diﬀerential privacy and informational leakage
Measure Explanations
Diﬀerential privacy Two parameters 𝜀and 𝛿represent the privacy
guarantee, i.e., the probability an attacker might
guess whether an individual’s data was in the
training set, and the probability this guarantee
may not hold, respectively [32]. Recent work by
Jayaraman and Evans [68]i n v e s t i g a t e st h e
practical challenges of using diﬀerentially
private machine learning. Estimation methods
for privacy guarantees are presented in [150].
Information leakage The amount of information about an individual
leaked by an AI system. Work by Hannun et
al. [49] explores using a speciﬁc measure
(Fisher information) for quantifying leakage.
Information leakage can also be measured by
evaluating how eﬀective certain attacks are. For
instance, membership inference attacks allow
attackers to potentially learn if a data point was
used to train the model (see, e.g., [60])
a rigorous evaluation of implemented measures, ensuring
they meet the compliance and quality standards established
by regulations such as GDPR. For instance, Privacy Im-
pact Assessments (PIA) and Data Protection Impact Assess-
ments (DPIA) should be carried out in certain cases. Other
standards include ISO 31700 Privacy by Design Standard,
KMPG’s Privacy by Design Assessment Framework, ISO
27001.
The literature on assessing the privacy of AI systems pro-
vides some concrete measures listed in Table4.
Diversity and fairness Given two groups of agents that
diﬀer only in a number of protected characteristics, an AI-
enabled system is fair when the outcome of the system does
not change signiﬁcantly for similar inputs only diﬀering on
legally protected or diversity-related characteristics. Fairness
is typically categorized into two broad categories: group and
individual fairness. Group fairness refers to guaranteeing
a statistical notion of similarity of outcomes across diﬀer-
ent groups of the society characterized by their sensitive
attributes. Individual fairness requires the outcomes of an
AI-enabled system to be identical (or similar with respect
to a distance measure) for individuals that only diﬀer with
respect to their sensitive attribute (or are similar, again with
respect to a distance measure on their other features). There
are diﬀerent metrics for measuring the change of outcomes
and similar inputs. We refer to recent textbooks [14, 77] and
surveys [101, 117] on the deﬁnitions of fairness for machine
learning and AI systems. In the remainder of this section, we
provide only some examples of such metrics and how they
can be used to measure fairness. We conclude by reviewing
some of the shortcomings of using these metrics as well as
mentioning some other diversity-related metrics that can be
measured on AI-enabled systems.
Some commonly used metrics for measuring fairness in-
clude: statistical parity diﬀerence (SPD), equal opportunity
diﬀerence (EOD), average odds diﬀerence (AOD) and dis-
parate impact (DI). Their deﬁnitions are provided in Table5.
Despite the rich literature on quantitative metrics of fair-
ness and diversity, researchers in this area ﬁnd that optimiz-
ing for speciﬁc metrics can result in more unfair systems [24].
Also such metrics can be gamed and the powerful actors in
an ecosystem may use the metric that works best for them or
optimize for the commonly-used metrics without providing
genuine support for fairness or diversity [107].
Societal and environmental sustainability To assess
the societal impact of AI systems, Algorithm Impact As-
sessment tools have been proposed, such as the one from the
AI Now Institute [121], which targets public agencies. With
the advent of generative AI, impact assessment has become
more challenging, as contextual factors, human interactions,
and the combination of modalities (e.g., text, images, videos)
have become increasingly relevant [140]. It is crucial to mea-
sure impact across several dimensions, some of which apply
diﬀerently to various modalities [131].
Measuring the precise environmental impact can be dif-
ﬁcult, as most AI systems are deployed in the cloud, where
the majority of carbon emissions stem from construction,
infrastructure, and hardware manufacturing [46].
When considering AI algorithms in isolation, most en-
ergy consumption occurs during the training phase, which
can last for months. Tools for measuring the carbon footprint
are available, such as the “Machine Learning Emissions Cal-
culator” [88] and the“Carbon Tracker” [9].
Accountability The main challenge regarding the ac-
countability of AI systems is the lack of comprehensive
“internal auditing”, i.e., auditing processes that should be
applied before deployment by companies designing such sys-
tems, rather than after deployment, when issues have already
arisen [118].
To quantify accountability, organizations need to formal-
ize ethical principles guiding development and measure com-
pliance at each stage. Outcomes should be documented, and
proactive risk analysis should be conducted [118]. Key Per-
formance Indicators can also be used to better measure ac-
countability [116].
3.3 Calibrated trust
Trust calibration is typically assessed through one of the fol-
lowing three methods (we refer to the survey by Wischnewski
et al. [144] for a more detailed overview):
Springer

--- PDF PAGE 10 ---
M. Liebherr et al.
Table 5 Summary of four common metrics for fairness as a part of trustworthiness: statistical parity diﬀerence (SPD), equal opportunity diﬀerence
(EOD), Average Odds Diﬀerence (AOD), and disparate impact (DI)
Fairness metric Intuition Formalization Explanation
Statistical Parity
Diﬀerence (SPD)
Equal rate of favorable outcomes
between majority and minority
SPD= 𝑃[𝑌
pred = 1|𝐴= 1]−
𝑃[𝑌pred = 1|𝐴= 0]
The diﬀerence of conditional probability
for predicting favorable outcomes between
the majority and minority conditions.
Non-zero values will classify the amount
of bias.
Disparate Impact
(DI)
Similar to SPD, only the
diﬀerence is replaced with the
ratio
DI = P[Y=1|A =1] /P[Y=1|A = 0] The ratio of conditional probability for
predicting favorable outcomes between the
majority and minority conditions.
Non-zero values will classify the amount
of bias.
Equal Opportunity
(EOD)
Equal rate of true (justiﬁed)
favorable outcomes between
majority and minority
EOD= 𝑃[𝑌pred = 1|𝐴= 1,𝑌= 1]−
𝑃[𝑌pred = 1|𝐴= 0,𝑌= 1]
The diﬀerence of conditional probability
for predicting true positive (favorable)
outcomes between the majority and
minority conditions. Non-zero values will
classify the amount of bias.
Average Odd
Diﬀerence (AOD)
Average of diﬀerences for false
(unjustiﬁed) and true favorable
outcomes between the majority
and minority
AOD= avg𝑖𝑖𝑛{0,1}(.5∗(𝑃[𝑌pred = 1|
𝐴= 1,𝑌=𝑖]−𝑃[𝑌pred = 1|𝐴= 0,
𝑌=𝑖]))
The diﬀerence of conditional probability
for predicting true positive (favorable)
outcomes between the majority
and minority conditions. Non-zero values
will classify the amount of bias in both
cases.
1. Relative measures: comparing perceived trustworthiness
among diﬀerent groups and systems, e.g., systems with
high and low trustworthiness; the relative diﬀerences
can be used to establish calibration of trust among user
groups;
2. Correlative measure: estimating the correlation between
the dynamics of trust and trustworthiness, for instance by
measuring how trust changes as trustworthiness evolves
(“trust sensitivity”); and
3. Behavioral measures: measuring the deviation from
“ideal” user behavior (e.g., response time) under diﬀer-
ent circumstances (e.g., in scenarios featuring diﬀerent
trustworthiness levels).
Given its ease of integration, the ﬁrst method is most fre-
quently employed in studies evaluating trust calibration. In
the context of XAI, Naiseh et al. [ 106] used the cognitive-
based trust scale introduced by Madsen and Gregor [ 96],
which measures how eﬀectively the XAI interface aids users
in comprehending, relying on and perceiving the technical
proﬁciency of the AI. Furthermore, the authors examined
behavioral markers of trust calibration, leveraging an objec-
tive metric proposed by Wang et al. [ 137], which assesses
the accuracy of participants’ decisions. In addition to the ad-
vantages of this method, Wischnewski and colleagues [144]
mention that the method doesn’t indicate whether a system
with lower capabilities might be seen as overly trustworthy or
untrustworthy, leading to over-trust or under-trust. Similarly,
a high-capability system might cause either excessive or in-
suﬃcient perceived trustworthiness, resulting in overtrust or
undertrust. Many interventions are possible to calibrate trust,
including 1) providing prior information about the system’s
trustworthiness factors, 2) providing run-time information
about the systems decisions and their underlying causes, and
3) receiving and providing feedback after interactions [144].
4 Causes and correlations
4.1 Trust factors
When considering antecedents of trust in AI, again we need
to apply them to the broad variety of AI-based systems (e.g.,
algorithms, automated vehicles, chatbots, and robots), result-
ing in a wide range of factors that can impact trust. Previ-
ous works propose a categorization of trust antecedents in
AI-based systems into three overarching groups relating to
the human trustor, the technology trustee, and shared con-
textual factors [74]. In the spectrum of AI-based systems,
factors within the human trustor category underscore the
signiﬁcance of ability-based elements (Competency/Under-
standing and Expertise) and along with characteristics-based
factors (Culture, Gender, and Personality traits). In the realm
of the technology trustee category, performance-based fac-
tors (Performance and Reliability) along with attribute-based
factors (e.g., AI Personality, Anthropomorphism, Behavior,
Reputation, and Transparency) are identiﬁed to be relevant.
Springer

--- PDF PAGE 11 ---
Dynamic calibration of trust and trustworthiness in AI-enabled systems
Fig. 3 Antecedents of trust in AI-enabled systems
Additionally, within the third category team-related (Com-
munication) and task-related factors (Risk) have been re-
ported to be relevant [47, 48, 57, 74, 148].
Regarding trustee-related factors, we would like to em-
phasize the role of anthropomorphism and more generally,
embodiment. In interpersonal relationships trust is notably
contingent upon the physical attributes of the trusted individ-
ual [22, 31]. In AI-based systems there is a great variety of
embodiment forms, which means that the degree of physical
appearance varies greatly: as a physical robot, as a virtual
agent or bot, or in forms that are invisible to the user, em-
bedded in a computer or another tool. Current empirical data
indicate that the extent and nature of embodiment, coupled
with the degree of machine intelligence integrated into the
technology, have considerable implications for the trust ex-
hibited by users [42].
Figure 3 describes the relationship of AI-relevant measure
of trust (see Sect. 3.1, the color coding describes the cate-
gory to which those factors belong), assessed before, during
and after interacting with the AI system as well as the in-
ﬂuencing factors on building trust, derived from the three
categories human trustee, technology trustee and contextual
factors. In order to inﬂuence trust, a feedback loop from the
measures to the inﬂuencing factors indicates the possibil-
ity of strengthening certain factors to enhance trust in the
AI-based system.
4.2 Trustworthiness factors
The principles of trustworthiness, covered in Sect. 2.2, can
be incorporated into the requirement speciﬁcation and sys-
tem design, and can be guaranteed by construction. Ex-
amples of such trustworthy-by-construction techniques in-
clude privacy-preserving architectures for AI [ 1] and AI-
enabled systems [134]; certiﬁed (adversarial) robustness for
AI [13, 23]; and inherently explainable AI models [105].
However, not all components of an AI-enabled system are
designed based on the trustworthiness principles and some
are obtained as third-party oﬀ-the-shelf components. In such
cases, in order to ensure trustworthiness, a rigorous speci-
ﬁcation of trustworthiness requirements [ 3] and structured
validation and veriﬁcation techniques [104] are needed. The
techniques involved in validation and veriﬁcation include:
formal veriﬁcation (including theorem proving and model
checking), various forms of testing (including model-based
testing and falsiﬁcation), and various forms of user studies
[10].
When shortcomings in trustworthiness principles are
detected, those can be remedied by deploying ﬁxes, re-
synthesizing and re-training parts of the system, and / or
developing and deploying complementary components and
wrappers to ensure the trustworthiness requirements [2].
4.3 Calibration and interplay
Trustworthiness of the AI-based system and human trust will
change during the course of interaction between the human
and the system. Based on the mental model of the human
(how the system will behave in certain situations or given
certain commands, trust is gained when the system behaves
accordingly, trust is lost if the system reacts unexpectedly.
How easy trust is lost or gained depends on the previous “trust
level” caused by the inﬂuencing factors described in Sect.4.1.
If human trust is low, measured in an initial assessment before
interacting with the system, the system needs to communicate
or display its trustworthiness more openly and clearly than if
human trust is initially high.
However, during the interaction between the human and
system, human trust will be inﬂuenced. If the human gains
more trust (adapting their mental model), the system can
reduce its explanation and the human is willing to reduce
the control over the system (e.g. from human-in-control to
human-in-the-loop). In order to seamlessly adapt the conﬁg-
uration of the system towards the level of human trust/men-
tal model assessed, the system needs to integrate certain
trust measurements to adapt automatically its explanations
or, if not possible, to describe which level of trust is needed
to successfully use the system (often generally indicated as
“beginner” or “expert level” user).
5 Implications for stakeholders
The description of trust, trustworthiness, and their interac-
tions cannot be uniform for all stakeholders. It is evident that
the general public does not have the same level of under-
standing of AI as a programmer or certiﬁer. Therefore, the
public may need additional explanations that are apparent
to developers. The following distinguishes between various
stakeholders, including the wider public, certiﬁcation bodies,
investigators, expert witnesses, and lawyers.
5.1 Implications for the general public
Artiﬁcial intelligence is transforming society in numerous
ways. It is crucial that individuals possess an understanding
Springer

--- PDF PAGE 12 ---
M. Liebherr et al.
of how these systems operate when working with or utilizing
them in public. To fully harness the potential of the tech-
nology, trust and trustworthiness in AI need to be aligned to
create calibrated trust. One way to achieve this could be the
education of the general public about the opportunities and
risks of using AI transparently, and how over- or under-trust
can aﬀect both the environment and the society. To achieve
this goal, discussion panels should facilitate open dialogue,
supported by easily understandable media that are accessible
to the general public through mass media such as TV, news-
papers and social media. However, this approach may be too
simplistic. It could be argued that the burden of understand-
ing these complex systems should not fall solely on end users
[124]. An alternative option would be to design systems and
contexts in which trustworthy technologies are the norm, and
to develop strategies to ensure that only reliable systems are
deployed. Furthermore, the development of AI systems could
be informed by the understanding that these systems adapt to
the trust level of users and provide clear signals when they are
over- or under-trusted. This would shift the responsibility for
ensuring the trustworthiness of AI systems from the general
public to the developers and deployers of these technologies.
5.2 Implications for certiﬁcation authorities and
assessors
In the context of certifying AI systems, independent certiﬁ-
cation bodies should have a calibrated trust in the technology.
Over- or under-trust would be fatal, especially in the case of
system safety acceptance. Depending on how safety-critical
a system is, it must meet diﬀerent safety requirements. The
safety requirements for an AI system for automated driving
are signiﬁcantly higher than for an AI system for creative
image creation. An error in automated driving can have fatal
consequences, whereas an error in the second example only
produces undesirable results. Certiﬁcation bodies must be
able to verify that AI developers have thoroughly tested and
checked their systems to achieve a trustworthy AI system.
Depending on the safety requirements, the developers will
need to provide the technical description of the system, the
source code, and information about how and with which data
the AI has been trained.
5.3 Implications for investigators, expert
witnesses and lawyers
To ensure a fair judgement or appropriate compensation in
the event of a dispute or accident, investigators, lawyers or
other experts require access to reliable information. This in-
formation should be provided by those responsible for the
safety and inspection of the AI. It is also important that
lawyers, investigators and experts can comprehend the causes
and consequences of the situation. Over- or under-trust is
not acceptable in this role. To achieve reliable trust in AI,
lawyers, investigators and experts must also consider the at-
tributes of the developers. This includes fundamental aspects
such as the implementation of quality assurance and a data
security strategy. Certiﬁcation of these aspects, for exam-
ple, in accordance with [ 65]o r[ 66] and TISAX, enhances
trustworthiness.
6 Conclusions
This paper explores trust and trustworthiness in AI systems,
and proposes a formalization that relies on the system, the
scenario, and the user, highlighting the highly contextual
nature of these concepts. Alignment of trust and trustwor-
thiness is essential to achieve calibrated trust, i.e., a state in
which the user’s trust reﬂects the actual level of trustworthi-
ness for a speciﬁc scenario. Calibration is a dynamic process,
as the user acquires experience and their expectations adapt.
Under-trust or over-trust may occur when the alignment is
not achieved, and both can have detrimental eﬀects on the
eﬀectiveness and safety of AI systems.
As formalization requires quantifying trust and trustwor-
thiness, we review a range of approaches to measure trust,
from subjective self-reports to objective behavioral assess-
ments, and approaches to measure trustworthiness, detailing
methods for assessing a variety of dimensions, as well as
methods to measure trust calibration.
We analyze factors that can impact these concepts. For
trust, the impacts stem from a combination of human fac-
tors, technology attributes, and contextual inﬂuences. For
trustworthiness, we describe ways in which its principles
can be integrated into AI system design, highlighting the
need for validation and veriﬁcation. For calibrated trust, ef-
fective communication about the AI system’s behavior and
capabilities can help the user adjust their trust levels appro-
priately. Finally, we discuss the incarnation of (calibrated)
trust and trustworthiness in a range of contexts, emphasizing
the need for tailored explanations about the system to dif-
ferent stakeholders. However, several signiﬁcant challenges
remain. One major challenge is the dynamic calibration of
trust over time. Trust levels are not static; they ﬂuctuate based
on system performance and user experiences, and current
systems lack the adaptability to manage these ﬂuctuations
eﬀectively. Furthermore, balancing cognitive and emotional
trust presents a complex issue. While AI systems can support
cognitive trust by oﬀering transparency and logical reason-
ing, fostering emotional trust—rooted in feelings of security
and connection—requires further attention.
Assessing trustworthiness also remains problematic, es-
pecially across diverse scenarios and use cases. Many AI
systems still lack the transparency and robustness necessary
Springer

--- PDF PAGE 13 ---
Dynamic calibration of trust and trustworthiness in AI-enabled systems
for users to gauge their reliability conﬁdently. This is com-
pounded by the dual issue of overtrust and distrust, where
users either rely too heavily on systems or fail to utilize them
fully, both of which can lead to suboptimal or even dangerous
outcomes.
Additionally, while there is growing research on trust in
AI, much of it focuses on short-term interactions. Little is
understood about the dynamics of trust in long-term engage-
ments, which are critical for many real-world applications.
Ethical concerns and fairness in AI systems also pose ongo-
ing challenges. Ensuring that AI operates in a way that is both
transparent and fair while maintaining performance requires
more sophisticated solutions than currently available.
Trust calibration becomes particularly diﬃcult in high-
risk domains, such as healthcare or autonomous driving,
where system failures can have severe consequences. In these
areas, achieving calibrated trust is essential, yet it remains
one of the most pressing challenges. Finally, addressing these
issues will require stronger cross-disciplinary collaboration,
integrating insights from ﬁelds such as cognitive psychology,
computer science, and ethics to develop more comprehensive
frameworks for trust and trustworthiness in AI.
Future research must focus on overcoming these chal-
lenges by reﬁning the methods used to assess trust, design-
ing systems that can adapt to trust dynamics in real time, and
ensuring that AI systems adhere to ethical and fairness stan-
dards. Only through this approach can we build AI systems
that are not only eﬀective but also trustworthy, ensuring their
safe and beneﬁcial integration into society.
Appendix: Glossary of terms
– Trust: A user-centered concept, referring to the epistemic
state that the system is going to behave as expected in a
given situation, characterized by a certain level of risk and
uncertainty.
– Trustworthiness: A property of a system where it satisﬁes
the user’s requirements in a speciﬁc scenario. A system
is considered trustworthy if it consistently meets these
expectations across various scenarios.
– Calibrated Trust: Trust of a user in a system that matches
the actual level of trustworthiness for a given scenario. Cal-
ibration is considered dynamic, where trust adapts based
on ongoing interaction with the system.
– Cognitive trust: Trust of a user in a system that matches
the actual level of trustworthiness for a given scenario. Cal-
ibration is considered dynamic, where trust adapts based
on ongoing interaction with the system.
– Emotional trust: Trust that emerges from emotional con-
nections, often involving the feeling of security users ex-
perience during interactions with the system.
– Overtrust: A situation where a user places too much trust
in a system, exceeding the system’s actual trustworthiness,
potentially leading to harmful outcomes.
– Distrust: A scenario where a user’s level of trust in a
system is lower than the system’s actual trustworthiness,
which can lead to underuse of the system’s capabilities.
– Human-in-the-loop: A control paradigm where human
operators are actively involved in the decision-making pro-
cesses of the system.
– Human-on-the-loop: A control paradigm where human
operators monitor and oversee the system’s operations but
intervene only when necessary.
– Human-in-command: A control paradigm where human
operators have overarching control over the system, in-
cluding both decision-making and oversight capabilities.
– Adversarial Attacks: Deliberate manipulations aimed at
exploiting the weaknesses of AI systems, often to produce
erroneous outputs.
– Diﬀerential Privacy: A technique used to protect indi-
viduals’ privacy by introducing randomness into the data
analysis process, ensuring the data output is indistinguish-
able from queries with or without a particular individual’s
data.
– Statistical Parity: A fairness metric ensuring that the rate
of favorable outcomes is the same across majority and
minority groups.
– Explainability (XAI): The degree to which a human user
can understand the reasons behind an AI system’s deci-
sions or actions.
Funding information Open Access funding enabled and organized
by Projekt DEAL. Mohammad Reza Mousavi has been partially sup-
ported by the UKRI Trustworthy Autonomous Systems Node in Ver-
iﬁability, Grant Award Reference EP/V026801/2, EPSRC project on
Veriﬁed Simulation for Large Quantum Systems (VSL-Q), grant ref-
erence EP/Y005244/1 and the EPSRC project on Robust and Reliable
Quantum Computing (RoaRQ), Investigation 009 Model-based mon-
itoring and calibration of quantum computations (ModeMCQ), grant
reference EP/W032635/1.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons At-
tribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adap-
tation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in
the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a
copy of this licence, visithttp://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
1. Abadi, M., Chu, A., Goodfellow, I., McMahan, H.B., Mironov,
I., Talwar, K., Zhang, L.: Deep learning with diﬀerential pri-
vacy. In: Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on
Springer

--- PDF PAGE 14 ---
M. Liebherr et al.
Computer and Communications Security, CCS ’16, pp. 308–318.
Association for Computing Machinery, New York (2016)
2. Abdessalem, R.B., Panichella, A., Nejati, S., Briand, L.C., Stifter,
T.: Automated repair of feature interaction failures in automated
driving systems. In: Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGSOFT In-
ternational Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis, ISSTA
2020, pp. 88–100. Association for Computing Machinery, New
York (2020)
3. Abeywickrama, D.B., Bennaceur, A., Chance, G., Demiris, Y.,
Kordoni, A., Levine, M., Moﬀat, L., Moreau, L., Mousavi, M.R.,
Nuseibeh, B., Ramamoorthy, S., Ringert, J.O., Wilson, J., Wind-
sor, S., Eder, K.: On specifying for trustworthiness. Commun.
ACM 67(1), 98–109 (dec 2023)
4. Ajenaghughrure, I.B., Da Costa Sousa, S., Lamas, D.: Measur-
ing trust with psychophysiological signals: a systematic mapping
study of approaches used. Multimodal Technol. Interact.4(3), 63
(2020)
5. Ajzen, I.: The theory of planned behavior. Organ. Behav. Hum.
Decis. Process. 50(2), 179–211 (1991). Theories of Cognitive
Self-Regulation
6. Alsaid, A., Li, M., Chiou, E.K., Lee, J.D.: Measuring trust: a text
analysis approach to compare, contrast, and select trust question-
naires. Front. Psychol.14 (2023)
7. Anderson, M., Fort, K.: Human where? A new scale deﬁning
human involvement in technology communities from an ethical
standpoint. Int. Rev. Inf. Ethics31(1) (Nov. 2022)
8. Angelgardt, A., Gorbunova, E., Chumakova, M.: An assessment
of trust in artiﬁcial intelligent agents: Tool development. Higher
School of Economics Research Paper No. WP BRP, 128 (2021)
9. Anthony, L.F.W., Kanding, B., Selvan, R.: Carbontracker: track-
ing and predicting the carbon footprint of training deep learning
models. In: ICML Workshop on Challenges in Deploying and
Monitoring Machine Learning Systems (July 2020).arXiv:2007.
03051
10. Araujo, H., Mousavi, M.R., Varshosaz, M.: Testing, validation,
and veriﬁcation of robotic and autonomous systems: a systematic
review. ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.32(2) (mar 2023)
11. Aroyo, A.M., De Bruyne, J., Dheu, O., Fosch-Villaronga, E.,
Gudkov, A., Hoch, H., Jones, S., Lutz, C., Sætra, H., Solberg, M.,
et al.: Overtrusting robots: setting a research agenda to mitigate
overtrust in automation. Paladyn. J. Behav. Robot.12(1), 423–436
(2021)
12. Bach, T.A., Khan, A., Hallock, H., Beltrão, G., Sousa, S.: A
systematic literature review of user trust in AI-enabled systems:
An hci perspective. Int. J. Hum.-Comput. Interact., 1–16 (2022)
13. Bai, L., Chen, C., Wang, W., Carin, L.: Certiﬁed adversarial ro-
bustness with additive noise. In: Wallach, H., Larochelle, H.,
Beygelzimer, A., d’Alché-Buc, F., Fox, E., Garnett, R. (eds.) Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 32. Curran
Associates, Red Hook (2019)
14. Barocas, S., Hardt, M., Narayanan, A.: Fairness and Machine
Learning: Limitations and Opportunities. MIT Press, Cambridge
(2023)
15. Bastani, O., Ioannou, Y., Lampropoulos, L., Vytiniotis, D., Nori,
A., Criminisi, A.: Measuring neural net robustness with con-
straints. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.29 (2016)
16. Bradley, M.M., Lang, P.J.: Measuring emotion: behavior, feel-
ing, and physiology. In: Cognitive Neuroscience of Emotion,
pp. 242–276. Oxford University Press, London (2000)
17. Brzowski, M., Nathan-Roberts, D.: Trust measurement in human–
automation interaction: a systematic review. In: Proceedings of
the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting,
vol. 63, pp. 1595–1599. SAGE Publications Sage CA, Los Ange-
les (2019)
18. Carter, J.A.: Simion and kelp on trustworthy AI. Asian J. Philos.
2(1), 18 (2023)
19. Chang, L.J., Doll, B.B., van ’t Wout, M., Frank, M.J., Sanfey,
A.G.: Seeing is believing: trustworthiness as a dynamic belief.
Cogn. Psychol. 61(2), 87–105 (2010)
20. Chen, H., Zhang, H., Si, S., Li, Y., Boning, D., Hsieh, C.-J.:
Robustness veriﬁcation of tree-based models. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst. 32 (2019)
21. Chen, J., Mishler, S., Hu, B.: Automation error type and methods
of communicating automation reliability aﬀect trust and perfor-
mance: an empirical study in the cyber domain. IEEE Trans.
Human-Mach. Syst. 51(5), 463–473 (2021)
22. Cho, J.E., Hu, H.: The eﬀect of service quality on trust and
commitment varying across generations. Int. J. Consum. Stud.
33(4), 468–476 (2009)
23. Cohen, J., Rosenfeld, E., Kolter, Z.: Certiﬁed adversarial robust-
ness via randomized smoothing. In: Chaudhuri, K., Salakhutdi-
nov, R. (eds.) Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on
Machine Learning. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
vol. 97, pp. 1310–1320. PMLR (09–15 Jun 2019)
24. Corbett-Davies, S., Gaebler, J.D., Nilforoshan, H., Shroﬀ, R.,
Goel, S.: The measure and mismeasure of fairness. J. Mach.
Learn. Res. 24, 312 (2023)
25. Critchley, H.D.: Electrodermal responses: what happens in the
brain. Neuroscientist 8(2), 132–142 (2002)
26. Daschner, S., Obermaier, R.: Algorithm aversion? On the inﬂu-
ence of advice accuracy on trust in algorithmic advice. J. Decis.
Syst. 31(sup1), 77–97 (2022)
27. Davis, F.D.: A technology acceptance model for empirically test-
ing new end-user information systems: Theory and results. PhD
thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (1985)
28. De Visser, E.J., Peeters, M.M.M., Jung, M.F., Kohn, S., Shaw,
T.H., Pak, R., Neerincx, M.A.: Towards a theory of longitudinal
trust calibration in human–robot teams. Int. J. Soc. Robot. 12(2),
459–478 (2020)
29. Ding, X., Wei, T., Cao, C.: Towards a four-dimensional dynamic
trust model in b2c cross-border e-commerce. In: Proceedings
of the 2022 13th International Conference on E-Education, E-
Business, E-Management, and E-Learning, pp. 414–418 (2022)
30. Dolgov, I., Kaltenbach, E.K., Khalaf, A.S., Toups, Z.O.: Mea-
suring human performance in the ﬁeld. In: Human Factors in
Practice, pp. 37–54. CRC Press, Boca Raton (2017)
31. Duarte, J., Siegel, S., Young, L.: Trust and credit: the role of
appearance in peer-to-peer lending. Rev. Financ. Stud. 25(8),
2455–2484 (2012)
32. Dwork, C., Kenthapadi, K., McSherry, F., Mironov, I., Naor, M.:
Our data, ourselves: privacy via distributed noise generation. In:
Advances in Cryptology-EUROCRYPT 2006: 24th Annual Inter-
national Conference on the Theory and Applications of Crypto-
graphic Techniques, St. Petersburg, Russia, May 28-June 1, 2006.
Proceedings 25, pp. 486–503. Springer (2006)
33. Dzhelyova, M., Perrett, D.I., Jentzsch, I.: Temporal dynamics of
trustworthiness perception. Brain Res.1435, 81–90 (2012)
34. Ehlers, R.: Formal veriﬁcation of piece-wise linear feed-forward
neural networks. In: D’Souza, D., Kumar, K.N. (eds.) Auto-
mated Technology for Veriﬁcation and Analysis - 15th Interna-
tional Symposium, ATVA 2017, Pune, India, October 3-6, 2017,
Proceedings. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 10482,
pp. 269–286. Springer, Berlin (2017)
35. Fahim, M.A.A., Khan, M.M.H., Jensen, T., Albayram, Y., Coman,
E.: Do integral emotions aﬀect trust? The mediating eﬀect of
emotions on trust in the context of human-agent interaction. In:
Designing Interactive Systems Conference 2021, pp. 1492–1503
(2021)
36. Fer, V., Lafond, D., Coppin, G., Bollaert, M., Grisvard, O., De
Loor, P.: Trust in automation: analysis and model of operator
trust in decision aid AI over time. In: Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence for Defense (2023)
Springer

--- PDF PAGE 15 ---
Dynamic calibration of trust and trustworthiness in AI-enabled systems
37. Fishbein, M., Ajzen, I.: Belief, Attitude, Intention, and Behav-
ior: An Introduction to Theory and Research. Longman Higher
Education (1977)
38. Gambetta, D.: Trust: Making and Breaking Cooperative Rela-
tions. Wiley-Basil Blackwell (1988)
39. Gefen, D., Karahanna, E., Straub, D.W.: Trust and tam in online
shopping: an integrated model. MIS Q., 51–90 (2003)
40. Gehr, T., Mirman, M., Drachsler-Cohen, D., Tsankov, P., Chaud-
huri, S., Vechev, M.: Ai2: safety and robustness certiﬁcation of
neural networks with abstract interpretation. In: 2018 IEEE Sym-
posium on Security and Privacy (SP), pp. 3–18. IEEE (2018)
41. Gillath, O., Ai, T., Branicky, M.S., Keshmiri, S., Davison, R.B.,
Spaulding, R.: Attachment and trust in artiﬁcial intelligence.
Comput. Hum. Behav.115, 106607 (2021)
42. Glikson, E., Woolley, A.W.: Human trust in artiﬁcial intelligence:
review of empirical research. Acad. Manag. Ann.14(2), 627–660
(2020)
43. Gold, C., Körber, M., Hohenberger, C., Lechner, D., Bengler,
K.: Trust in automation–before and after the experience of take-
over scenarios in a highly automated vehicle. Proc. Manuf. 3,
3025–3032 (2015)
44. Goodyear, K., Parasuraman, R., Chernyak, S., Madhavan, P.,
Deshpande, G., Krueger, F.: Advice taking from humans and ma-
chines: an fmri and eﬀective connectivity study. Front. Human
Neurosci. 10, 542 (2016)
45. Gulati, S., Sousa, S., Lamas, D.: Design, development and evalua-
tion of a human-computer trust scale. Behav. Inf. Technol.38(10),
1004–1015 (2019)
46. Gupta, U., Kim, Y.G., Lee, S., Tse, J., Lee, H.-H.S., Wei, G.-Y.,
Brooks, D., Wu, C.-J.: Chasing carbon: the elusive environmental
footprint of computing. IEEE MICRO42(4), 37–47 (2022)
47. Hancock, P.A., Billings, D.R., Schaefer, K.E., Chen, J.Y.C., De
Visser, E.J., Parasuraman, R.: A meta-analysis of factors aﬀecting
trust in human-robot interaction. Hum. Factors 53(5), 517–527
(2011)
48. Hancock, P.A., Kessler, T.T., Kaplan, A.D., Brill, J.C., Szalma,
J.L.: Evolving trust in robots: speciﬁcation through sequential
and comparative meta-analyses. Hum. Factors63(7), 1196–1229
(2021)
49. Hannun, A.Y., Guo, C., van der Maaten, L.: Measuring data leak-
age in machine-learning models with Fisher information (ex-
tended abstract). In: Raedt, L.D. (ed.) IJCAI, pp. 5284–5288
(2022)
50. Hardin, R.: Trust and Trustworthiness. Russell Sage Foundation
Series on Trust. Russell Sage Foundation, Thousand Oaks (2002)
51. Hardin, R.: Trust, vol. 10. Polity (2006)
52. Hergeth, S., Lorenz, L., Vilimek, R., Krems, J.F.: Keep your
scanners peeled: gaze behavior as a measure of automation trust
during highly automated driving. Hum. Factors 58(3), 509–519
(2016)
53. Hickman, E., Petrin, M.: Trustworthy AI and corporate gover-
nance: the eu’s ethics guidelines for trustworthy artiﬁcial intel-
ligence from a company law perspective. Eur. Bus. Organ. Law
Rev.22, 593–625 (2021)
54. High-Level Expert Group on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI HLEG):
Assessment list for trustworthy AI (ALTAI) (2020). Last ac-
cessed: 08 April 2024
55. High-Level Expert Group on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI HLEG):
Ethics guidelines for trustworthy AI (2019). Last accessed: 08
April 2024
56. Hirshﬁeld, L.M., Bobko, P., Barelka, A., Hirshﬁeld, S.H., Far-
rington, M.T., Gulbronson, S., Paverman, D.: Using noninvasive
brain measurement to explore the psychological eﬀects of com-
puter malfunctions on users during human-computer interactions.
Adv. Hum.-Comput. Interact.2014, 2–2 (2014)
57. Hoﬀ, K.A., Bashir, M.: Trust in automation: integrating empiri-
cal evidence on factors that inﬂuence trust. Hum. Factors 57(3),
407–434 (2015)
58. Hoﬀman, R., Mueller, S., Klein, G., Litman, J.: Measuring trust
in the XAI context. In: Tech reports for the DARPA XAI program:
Task Area 2. PsyArXiv (2021)
59. Hoﬀman, R.R., Mueller, S.T., Klein, G., Litman, J.: Measures
for explainable AI: explanation goodness, user satisfaction, men-
tal models, curiosity, trust, and human-AI performance. Front.
Comput. Sci. 5, 1096257 (2023)
60. Hu, H., Salcic, Z., Sun, L., Dobbie, G., Yu, P.S., Zhang, X.:
Membership inference attacks on machine learning: a survey.
ACM Comput. Surv.54(11s), 1–37 (2022)
61. Huang, S., Papernot, N., Goodfellow, I., Duan, Y., Abbeel, P.: Ad-
versarial attacks on neural network policies (2017). arXiv preprint
arXiv:1702.02284
62. Innovate UK: Report on the core principles and opportunities for
responsible and trustworthy ai (2023)
63. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers IEEE: IEEE
P7009: IEEE Draft Standard for Fail-Safe Design of Autonomous
and Semi-Autonomous Systems (2024). Last accessed: 08 April
2024
64. International Organization for Standardization (ISO): ISO 10218-
1:2011 robots and robotic devices safety requirements for indus-
trial robots (2011). Last accessed: 08 April 2024
65. International Organization for Standardization (ISO): ISO
9001:2015 quality management systems — requirements (2015).
Last accessed: 01 July 2024
66. International Organization for Standardization (ISO): ISO/IEC
27001:2022 information security, cybersecurity and privacy pro-
tection — information security management systems — require-
ments, 201. Last accessed: 01 July 2024
67. Jacovi, A., Marasović, A., Miller, T., Goldberg, Y.: Formalizing
trust in artiﬁcial intelligence: prerequisites, causes and goals of
human trust in AI. In: Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Confer-
ence on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 624–635
(2021)
68. Jayaraman, B., Evans, D.: Evaluating diﬀerentially private ma-
chine learning in practice. In: 28th USENIX Security Symposium
(USENIX Security 19), pp. 1895–1912 (2019)
69. Jian, J.-Y., Bisantz, A.M., Drury, C.G.: Foundations for an em-
pirically determined scale of trust in automated systems. Int. J.
Cogn. Ergon. 4(1), 53–71 (2000)
70. Johnson, D., Grayson, K.: Cognitive and aﬀective trust in service
relationships. J. Bus. Res.58(4), 500–507 (2005)
71. Jones, K.: Trustworthiness. Ethics 123(1), 61–85 (2012)
72. Jung, E.-S., Dong, S.-Y., Lee, S.-Y.: Neural correlates of variations
in human trust in human-like machines during non-reciprocal
interactions. Sci. Rep. 9(1), 9975 (2019)
73. Kantchelian, A., Tygar, J.D., Joseph, A.: Evasion and harden-
ing of tree ensemble classiﬁers. In: International Conference on
Machine Learning, pp. 2387–2396. PMLR (2016)
74. Kaplan, A.D., Kessler, T.T., Brill, J.C., Hancock, P.A.: Trust in
artiﬁcial intelligence: meta-analytic ﬁndings. Hum. Factors65(2),
337–359 (2023)
75. Katz, G., Huang, D.A., Ibeling, D., Julian, K., Lazarus, C., Lim,
R., Shah, P., Thakoor, S., Wu, H., Zeljić, A., Dill, D.L., Kochen-
derfer, M.J., Barrett, C.: The marabou framework for veriﬁca-
tion and analysis of deep neural networks. In: Dillig, I., Tasiran,
S. (eds.) Computer Aided Veriﬁcation, pp. 443–452. Springer,
Cham (2019)
76. Kaur, D., Uslu, S., Rittichier, K.J., Durresi, A.: Trustworthy artiﬁ-
cial intelligence: a review. ACM Comput. Surv.55(2) (jan 2022)
77. Kearns, M., Roth, A.: The Ethical Algorithm: The Science of So-
cially Aware Algorithm Design. Oxford University Press, London
(2019)
Springer

--- PDF PAGE 16 ---
M. Liebherr et al.
78. Kelly, S., Kaye, S.-A., Oviedo-Trespalacios, O.: What factors con-
tribute to the acceptance of artiﬁcial intelligence? A systematic
review. Telemat. Inform.77, 101925 (2023)
79. Kelp, C., Simion, M.: What is trustworthiness? Noûs 57(3),
667–683 (2023)
80. Khatri, V., Brown, C.V.: Designing data governance. Commun.
ACM 53(1), 148–152 (2010)
81. Khawaji, A., Zhou, J., Chen, F., Marcus, N.: Using galvanic skin
response (gsr) to measure trust and cognitive load in the text-chat
environment. In: Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Confer-
ence Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Sys-
tems, pp. 1989–1994 (2015)
82. Kohn, S.C., de Visser, E.J., Wiese, E., Lee, Y.-C., Shaw, T.H.:
Measurement of trust in automation: a narrative review and ref-
erence guide. Front. Psychol.12, 604977 (2021)
83. Komiak, S.Y.X., Benbasat, I.: The eﬀects of personalization and
familiarity on trust and adoption of recommendation agents. MIS
Q., 941–960 (2006)
84. Körber, M.: Theoretical considerations and development of a
questionnaire to measure trust in automation. In: Proceedings
of the 20th Congress of the International Ergonomics Associa-
tion (IEA 2018) Volume VI: Transport Ergonomics and Human
Factors (TEHF), Aerospace Human Factors and Ergonomics 20,
pp. 13–30. Springer, Berlin (2019)
85. Körber, M., Prasch, L., Bengler, K.: Why do I have to drive now?
Post hoc explanations of takeover requests. Hum. Factors 60(3),
305–323 (2018)
86. Kusche, I.: Possible harms of artiﬁcial intelligence and the eu ai
act: fundamental rights and risk. J. Risk Res., 1–14 (2024)
87. Kyung, N., Kwon, H.E.: Rationally trust, but emotionally? The
roles of cognitive and aﬀective trust in laypeople’s acceptance of
AI for preventive care operations. Prod. Oper. Manag. (2022)
88. Lacoste, A., Luccioni, A., Schmidt, V., Dandres, T.: Quantifying
the carbon emissions of machine learning (2019). CoRR. arXiv:
1910.09700
89. Lankton, N.K., McKnight, D.H., Tripp, J.: Technology, human-
ness, and trust: rethinking trust in technology. J. Assoc. Inf. Syst.
16(10), 1 (2015)
90. Lee, J., Moray, N.: Trust, control strategies and allocation of func-
tion in human-machine systems. Ergonomics35(10), 1243–1270
(1992)
91. Lee, J.D., See, K.A.: Trust in automation: designing for appropri-
ate reliance. Hum. Factors46(1), 50–80 (2004)
92. Lee, M., Ruijten, P., Frank, L., IJsselsteijn, W.: Here’s looking
at you, robot: the transparency conundrum in hri. In: 2023 32nd
IEEE International Conference on Robot and Human Interactive
Communication (RO-MAN), pp. 2120–2127. IEEE (2023)
93. Lewis, J.D., Weigert, A.: Trust as a social reality. Soc. Forces
63(4), 967–985 (1985)
94. Lu, Y., Sarter, N.: Feedback on system or operator performance:
which is more useful for the timely detection of changes in re-
liability, trust calibration and appropriate automation usage? In:
Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society An-
nual Meeting, vol. 63, pp. 312–316. SAGE Publications Sage CA,
Los Angeles (2019)
95. Lv, X., Yang, Y., Qin, D., Cao, X., Xu, H.: Artiﬁcial intelligence
service recovery: the role of empathic response in hospitality
customers’ continuous usage intention. Comput. Hum. Behav.
126, 106993 (2022)
96. Madsen, M., Gregor, S.: Measuring human-computer trust. In:
11th Australasian Conference on Information Systems, vol. 53,
pp. 6–8. Citeseer (2000)
97. Mayer, R.C., Davis, J.H., Schoorman, F.D.: An integrative model
of organizational trust. Acad. Manag. Rev.20(3), 709–734 (1995)
98. McAllister, D.J.: Aﬀect-and cognition-based trust as foundations
for interpersonal cooperation in organizations. Acad. Manag. J.
38(1), 24–59 (1995)
99. McKnight, D.H., Choudhury, V., Kacmar, C.: Developing and
validating trust measures for e-commerce: an integrative typol-
ogy. Inf. Syst. Res.13(3), 334–359 (2002)
100. Mcknight, D.H., Carter, M., Thatcher, J.B., Clay, P.F.: Trust in
a speciﬁc technology: an investigation of its components and
measures. ACM Trans. Manag. Inf. Syst.2(2), 1–25 (2011)
101. Mehrabi, N., Morstatter, F., Saxena, N., Lerman, K., Galstyan, A.:
A survey on bias and fairness in machine learning. ACM Comput.
Surv. 54(6) (July 2021)
102. Merritt, S.M.: Aﬀective processes in human–automation interac-
tions. Hum. Factors 53(4), 356–370 (2011)
103. Molm, L.D., Takahashi, N., Peterson, G.: Risk and trust in social
exchange: an experimental test of a classical proposition. Am. J.
Sociol. 105(5), 1396–1427 (2000)
104. Mousavi, M.R., Cavalcanti, A., Fisher, M., Dennis, L., Hi-
erons, R., Kaddouh, B., Law, E.L.-C., Richardson, R., Ringer,
J.O., Tyukin, I., Woodcock, J.: Trustworthy autonomous systems
through veriﬁability. Computer 56(2), 40–47 (2023)
105. Naiseh, M., Al-Thani, D., Jiang, N., Ali, R.: Explainable recom-
mendation: when design meets trust calibration. World Wide Web
24(5), 1857–1884 (2021)
106. Naiseh, M., Al-Thani, D., Jiang, N., Ali, R.: How the diﬀerent
explanation classes impact trust calibration: the case of clini-
cal decision support systems. Int. J. Hum.-Comput. Stud. 169,
102941 (2023)
107. Narayanan, A.: The limits of the quantitative approach to
discrimination (2022). Available online from https://www.cs.
princeton.edu/~arvindn/talks/baldwin-discrimination/baldwin-
discrimination-transcript.pdf
108. Narodytska, N., Kasiviswanathan, S., Ryzhyk, L., Sagiv, M.,
Walsh, T.: Verifying properties of binarized deep neural net-
works. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, vol. 32 (2018)
109. National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC): Guidelines for secure
ai system development (2023). Last accessed: 08 April 2024
110. National Institute of Standards and Technology: Artiﬁcial intel-
ligence risk management framework (AI RMF 1.0). Technical
report, US Department of Commerce (2023)
111. Neumann, P.G., Watson, R.N.M.: Capabilities revisited: a holistic
approach to bottom-to-top assurance of trustworthy systems. In:
Fourth Layered Assurance Workshop, Austin, Texas, December
2010
112. Okamura, K., Yamada, S.: Adaptive trust calibration for human-
AI collaboration. PLoS ONE 15(2), e0229132 (2020)
113. Open Roboethics Institute: Foresight into AI ethics in healthcare
(faie-h): a toolkit for creating an ethics roadmap for your health-
care AI project (2020). Last accessed: 08 April 2024
114. Parasuraman, R., Manzey, D.H.: Complacency and bias in human
use of automation: an attentional integration. Hum. Factors52(3),
381–410 (2010)
115. Parasuraman, R., Riley, V.: Humans and automation: use, misuse,
disuse, abuse. Hum. Factors39(2), 230–253 (1997)
116. Percy, C., Dragicevic, S., Sarkar, S., d’Avila Garcez, A.S.: Ac-
countability in AI: from principles to industry-speciﬁc accredita-
tion. AI Commun. 34(3), 181–196 (2021)
117. Pessach, D., Shmueli, E.: A review on fairness in machine learn-
ing. ACM Comput. Surv.55(3) (February 2022)
118. Raji, I.D., Smart, A., White, R.N., Mitchell, M., Gebru, T.,
Hutchinson, B., Smith-Loud, J., Theron, D., Barnes, P.: Clos-
ing the AI accountability gap: deﬁning an end-to-end framework
for internal algorithmic auditing. In: FAT* ’20, pp. 33–44. ACM,
New York (2020)
119. Ranzato, F., Zanella, M.: Robustness veriﬁcation of support vec-
tor machines. In: Static Analysis: 26th International Symposium,
SAS 2019, Porto, Portugal, October 8–11, 2019, Proceedings 26,
pp. 8–11. Springer (2019)
Springer

--- PDF PAGE 17 ---
Dynamic calibration of trust and trustworthiness in AI-enabled systems
120. Razin, Y.S., Feigh, K.M.: Converging measures and an emergent
model: a meta-analysis of human-automation trust questionnaires
(2023). arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.13799
121. Reisman, D., Schultz, J., Crawford, K., Whittaker, M.: Algorith-
mic impact assessments: a practical framework for public agency.
AI Now, 9 (2018)
122. Robbins, B.G.: What is trust? A multidisciplinary review, critique,
and synthesis. Sociol. Compass 10(10), 972–986 (2016)
123. Rotter, J.B.: Interpersonal trust, trustworthiness, and gullibility.
Am. Psychol. 35(1), 1 (1980)
124. Ryan, M.: In ai we trust: ethics, artiﬁcial intelligence, and relia-
bility. Sci. Eng. Ethics26(5), 2749–2767 (2020)
125. Schaefer, K.E.: Measuring trust in human robot interactions: de-
velopment of the “trust perception scale-hri”. In: Robust Intelli-
gence and Trust in Autonomous Systems, pp. 191–218. Springer,
Berlin (2016)
126. Schoorman, F.D., Mayer, R.C., Davis, J.H.: An integrative model
of organizational trust: Past, present, and future (2007)
127. Sifakis, J.: Trustworthy computing systems. In: SENSORNETS,
p. 5 (2012)
128. Sifakis, J., Harel, D.: Trustworthy autonomous system develop-
ment. ACM Trans. Embed. Comput. Syst.22(3), 1–24 (2023)
129. Singh, G., Gehr, T., Mirman, M., Püschel, M., Vechev, M.: Fast
and eﬀective robustness certiﬁcation. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst. 31 (2018)
130. Smuha, N.A., Ahmed-Rengers, E., Harkens, A., Li, W., Ma-
cLaren, J., Piselli, R., Yeung, K.: How the EU can achieve legally
trustworthy AI: a response to the European Commission’s pro-
posal for an artiﬁcial intelligence act. SSRN (2021)
131. Solaiman, I., Talat, Z., Agnew, W., Ahmad, L., Baker, D., Blod-
gett, S.L., Chen, C., Daumé, H. III, Dodge, J., Duan, I., et al.:
Evaluating the social impact of generative ai systems in systems
and society (2023). arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.05949
132. Stamboliev, E., Christiaens, T.: How empty is trustworthy ai? A
discourse analysis of the ethics guidelines of trustworthy ai. Crit.
Policy Stud. 19(1), 39–56 (2025)
133. Tjeng, V., Xiao, K., Tedrake, R.: Evaluating robustness of neural
networks with mixed integer programming (2017). arXiv preprint
arXiv:1711.07356
134. Ul Hassan, M., Rehmani, M.H., Chen, J.: Diﬀerential privacy
techniques for cyber physical systems: a survey. IEEE Commun.
Surv. Tutor.22(1), 746–789 (2020)
135. Ullrich, D., Butz, A., Diefenbach, S.: The development of
overtrust: an empirical simulation and psychological analysis
in the context of human–robot interaction. Front. Robot. AI 8,
554578 (2021)
136. Van Dongen, K., Van Maanen, P.-P.: A framework for explain-
ing reliance on decision aids. Int. J. Hum.-Comput. Stud. 71(4),
410–424 (2013)
137. Wang, D., Yang, Q., Abdul, A.M., Lim, B.Y.: Designing theory-
driven user-centric explainable AI. In: Brewster, S.A., Fitzpatrick,
G., Cox, A.L., Kostakos, V. (eds.) Proceedings of the 2019 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI 2019,
Glasgow, Scotland, UK, May 04-09, 2019, p. 601. ACM (2019)
138. Wang, E.K., Chen, C.-M., Zhao, D., Ip, W.H., Yung, K.L.: A
dynamic trust model in Internet of things. Soft Comput. 24,
5773–5782 (2020)
139. Waytz, A., Norton, M.I.: Botsourcing and outsourcing: robot,
British, Chinese, and German workers are for thinking—not
feeling—jobs. Emotion 14(2), 434 (2014)
140. Weidinger, L., Rauh, M., Marchal, N., Manzini, A., Hendricks,
L . A . ,M a t e o s - G a r c i a ,J . ,B e r g m a n ,S . ,K a y ,J . ,G r i ﬃ n ,C . ,B a r i a c h ,
B., et al.: Sociotechnical safety evaluation of generative ai systems
(2023). arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.11986
141. Weng, L., Zhang, H., Chen, H., Song, Z., Hsieh, C.-J., Daniel,
L., Boning, D., Dhillon, I.: Towards fast computation of certi-
ﬁed robustness for relu networks. In: International Conference on
Machine Learning, pp. 5276–5285. PMLR (2018)
142. Wiegmann, D.A., Rich, A., Zhang, H.: Automated diagnostic
aids: the eﬀects of aid reliability on users’ trust and reliance.
Theor. Issues Ergon.2(4), 352–367 (2001)
143. Wischnewski, M., Krämer, N., Müller, E.: Measuring and un-
derstanding trust calibrations for automated systems: a survey of
the state-of-the-art and future directions. In: Proceedings of the
2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
pp. 1–16 (2023)
144. Wischnewski, M., Krämer, N.C., Müller, E.: Measuring and un-
derstanding trust calibrations for automated systems: a survey of
the state-of-the-art and future directions. In: Schmidt, A., Väänä-
nen, K., Goyal, T., Kristensson, P.O., Peters, A., Mueller, S.,
Williamson, J.R., Wilson, M.L. (eds.) Proceedings of the 2023
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI
2023, Hamburg, Germany, April 23-28, 2023, pp. 755:1–755:16.
ACM (2023)
145. Wojton, H.M., Porter, D., Lane, S.T., Bieber, C., Madhavan, P.:
Initial validation of the trust of automated systems test (toast). J.
Soc. Psychol. 160(6), 735–750 (2020)
146. Woods, D.D.: Trust emerges from the dynamics of reciprocity,
responsibility and resilience in networked systems. Presentation
at the working meeting on trust in cyberdomains. Institute for
Human and Machine Cognition, Pensacola, FL. Supported by the
Human Eﬀectiveness Directorate, Air Force Research Laboratory,
Wright-Patterson AFB, OH (2009)
147. Xiang, W., Tran, H.-D., Johnson, T.T.: Output reachable set es-
timation and veriﬁcation for multilayer neural networks. IEEE
Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst.29(11), 5777–5783 (2018)
148. Yang, R., Wibowo, S.: User trust in artiﬁcial intelligence: a com-
prehensive conceptual framework. EM32(4), 2053–2077 (2022)
149. Yuksel, B.F., Collisson, P., Czerwinski, M.: Brains or beauty: how
to engender trust in user-agent interactions. ACM Trans. Internet
Technol. 17(1), 1–20 (2017)
150. Zanella-Beguelin, S., Wutschitz, L., Tople, S., Salem, A., Rühle,
V., Paverd, A., Naseri, M., Köpf, B., Jones, D.: Bayesian esti-
mation of diﬀerential privacy. In: International Conference on
Machine Learning, pp. 40624–40636. PMLR (2023)
151. Zicari, R.V., Brodersen, J., Brusseau, J., Düdder, B., Eichhorn, T.,
Ivanov, T., Kararigas, G., Kringen, P., McCullough, M., Möslein,
F., Mushtaq, N., Roig, G., Stürtz, N., Tolle, K., Tithi, J.J. van
Halem, I., Westerlund, M.: Z-inspection (R): a process to assess
trustworthy ai. IEEE Trans. Technol. Soc.2(2), 83–97 (2021)
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to ju-
risdictional claims in published maps and institutional aﬃliations.
Springer