--- PDF PAGE 1 ---
r Academy of Management Annals
2020, Vol. 14, No. 2, 627 –660.
https://doi.org/10.5465/annals.2018.0057
HUMAN TRUST IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE: REVIEW
OF EMPIRICAL RESEARCH
ELLA GLIKSON 1
Bar Ilan University
ANITA WILLIAMS WOOLLEY
Carnegie Mellon University
Artificial intelligence (AI) characterizes a new generation of technologies capable of
interacting with the environment and aiming to simulate human intelligence. The suc-
cess of integrating AI into organizations critically depends on workers ’ trust in AI
technology. This review explains how AI differs from other technologies and presents
the existing empirical research on the determinants of human “trust” in AI, conducted in
multiple disciplines over the last 20 years. Based on the reviewed literature, we identify
the form of AI representation (robot, virtual, and embedded) and its level of machine
intelligence (i.e., its capabilities) as important antecedents to the development of trust
and propose a framework that addresses the elements that shape users ’ cognitive and
emotional trust. Our review reveals the important role of AI ’s tangibility, transparency,
reliability, and immediacy behaviors in developing cognitive trust, and the role of AI ’s
anthropomorphism specifically for emotional trust. We also note several limitations in
the current evidence base, such as the diversity of trust measures and overreliance on
short-term, small sample, and experimental studies, where the development of trust is
likely to be different than in longer-term, higher stakes field environments. Based on our
review, we suggest the most promising paths for future research.
Artificial intelligence (AI) represents a highly capable
and complex technology that aims to simulate human
intelligence. AI sits at the core of what has been termed
the “fourth industrial revolution” (Schwab, 2017), dis-
tinguished by the shift of agency and control from
humans to technology, and thus transforms our previous
understanding of human–technology relations (Murray,
Rhymer, & Sirmon, 2020). This revolution and its im-
plications highlight new theoretical and empirical
questions that need to be addressed by organizational
researchers, as AI has the potential to dramatically
change the overall workforce structure as well as the way
organizations and jobs are designed, decisions are made,
and knowledge is managed (Brynjolfsson, Mitchell, &
Rock, 2018; Danaher, 2017; Huang & Rust, 2018; Kaplan,
2015; Kellogg, Valentine, & Christin, 2019; Pfeffer, 2018;
Wirtz et al., 2018; Graetz & Michaels, 2018). The exact
shape of these changes is still to be determined; this
leaves room for an open, multidisciplinary dialogue that
should explore human–AI collaboration and further
facilitate the way AI is developed. The trust that users
develop in AI technology willbe central to determining
its role in organizations moving forward. Thus, we re-
view the latest empirical research to lay a foundation for
understanding the ways humans develop trust in AI.
As development of trust among humans is highly
dependent on the physical appearance of the trustee
(Cho & Hu, 2009; Duarte, Siegel, & Young, 2012), AI
embodiment is likely to be an important consideration in
trust development between humans and AI. Researchers
have examined AI in a variety of embodiment forms: as
a physical robot, a virtual agent or bot, or in forms that are
invisible to the user, embedded inside of a computer or
other tool. In addition to variance in AI embodiment,
researchers examined human trust in AI under different
levels of AI machine intelligence, that is, its capabilities.
The work on this article was sponsored by the Defense Ad-
vanced Research Projects Agency and the Army Research
Office, and was accomplished under grant number W911NF-
17-1-0104 and W911NF-20-1-0006. The views and conclusions
contained in this paper are those of the authors and should not
be interpreted as representing the official policies, either
expressed or implied, of the Defense Advanced Research Pro-
jects Agency, the Army Research Office, or the U.S. govern-
ment. The U.S. government is authorized to reproduce and
distribute reprints for government purposes, notwithstanding
any copyright notation herein.
We greatly appreciate the constructive and thoughtful
feedback provided by Associate Editor Sharon Parker.
1 Corresponding author.
627
Copyright of the Academy of Management, all rights reserved. Contents may not be copied, emailed, posted to a listserv, or otherwise transmitted with out the copyright holder ’s express
written permission. Users may print, download, or email articles for individual use only.

--- PDF PAGE 2 ---
Higher machine intelli gence means more complex
technological abilities, which allow AI to produce more
autonomous and complex actions (Chen & Barnes,
2014; Hancock, Billings, Schaefer, Chen, De Visser, &
Parasuraman, 2011). Users are not always aware of the
actual technological sophi stication of AI; while in
some cases highly intelligent machines are acting in
their full capacity, in others the capability may not
be fully manifest in their behavior. For current pur-
poses, we focus on the trust of human users, and thus
address the perceived machine intelligence from the
users’ point of view.
Proceeding from the intersection of research on AI
and the extant literature on human trust, we organize
our review of the existing literature by considering the
physical appearance of AI (i.e., its representation),
addressing the level of machine intelligence, and look-
ing at the implications of each for the development of
both cognitive and emotional trust (McAllister, 1995). In
contrast to the existing reviews and meta-analyses that
focused on studies from a specific field, such as robotics
(Hancock et al., 2011) or human factors (Hoff & Bashir,
2015; Lee & See, 2004), this review integrates research
from different disciplines, providing a comprehensive
overview. For each AI representation (robotic, virtual,
and embedded), we discuss the common dimensions
that emerged from our review as relevant for cognitive
trust (tangibility, transparency, reliability, task charac-
teristics, and immediacy behaviors) and for emotional
trust (tangibility, anthropomorphism, and immediacy
behaviors).
LITERATURE REVIEW METHODOLOGY
This review presents the way trust in AI is cur-
rently discussed in the literatures of computer sci-
ence, human –computer interaction, human factors,
information systems, robotics, management, mar-
keting, and psychology. Focusing on human trust in
AI, we first used the Google Scholar platform, search-
ing for the following key words: AI, intelligent agents,
agent–human interaction, algorithm aversion, robot–
human interaction, intelligent automation, trust in
robot, and trust in technology. We limited the search
to articles published in the last 20 years (between
1999 and 2019) to address the empirical work
concomitant with the recent technological devel-
opment of AI. We screened articles based on the
content, including those relevant to human trust
in AI, while excluding descriptions of algorithm/
architecture (without reference to trust), or
those focusing on trust only among humans. We then
followed cross-reference techniques to find more
relevant articles. This search revealed approximately
200 peer-reviewed articles and conference pro-
ceedings from the fields of organizational behavior,
human–computer interactions, robot –human in-
teractions, information systems, information technol-
ogy, and engineering. Finally, we used three
databases, Business Source Premier, Engineering
Village, and PsycINFO, to complete the literature re-
view and, using the same guidelines, added an addi-
tional 50 articles based on their content. Of the
mentioned articles, only about 150 have presented
empirical research that directly or indirectly ad-
dresses human trust in AI. We have also included
most recent published review articles that focus on
trust in technology or in robotics in more general
terms.
In proceeding with our review, we first define AI
and then discuss the broader perspective of its in-
tegration into organizations and review the concept of
trust from a multidisciplinary perspective. We pres-
ent the empirical research for the three major types of
AI representations and consider the intersection with
the levels of machine intelligence, first for the devel-
opment of cognitive and then for emotional trust.
Next, we discuss the integration of the research, as
well as its implications for organizations, the existing
limitations, and directions for future research.
WHAT IS AI?
In management research, AI is defined as a new
generation of technologies capable of interacting
with the environment by (a) gathering information
from outside (including from natural language) or
from other computer systems; (b) interpreting this
information, recognizing patterns, inducing rules, or
predicting events; (c) generating results, answering
questions, or giving instructions to other systems;
and (d) evaluating the results of their actions and
improving their decision systems to achieve specific
objectives (Ferr `as-Hern ´andez, 2018). The interac-
tional properties of AI make it capable of learning
and changing its behavior based on the cues from the
environment (Frantz, 2003; Rahwan et al., 2019). As
the environment in which AI functions is usually
highly complex and partially random, AI ’s behavior
is not deterministic (Danks & London, 2017), and the
complex multilayered process of AI decision-making
is generally not transparent. This means that AI’sd e -
cisions could be difficult to predict, and the logic be-
hind each decision made is often poorly understood.
The futuristic literature assumes AI is a set of algo-
rithms able to perform all tasks just as well as, or even
628 JulyAcademy of Management Annals

--- PDF PAGE 3 ---
better than, humans. However, this type of superintelli-
gence, known as strong or general AI, does not yet exist,
and thus this review is focused on the weak or narrow AI
that is currently in use (Raj & Seamans, 2019; Russell &
Norvig, 1995). Weak AI is based on a variety of tech-
nologies that are able to achieve fragments of the sim-
ulation of human intelligence, such as face recognition.
To better understand how AI differs from more tradi-
tional technology, it is useful to explain one commonly
used component of AI, namely machine learning.
Machine learning is the ability of computers to
adjust their behavior based on the data to which they
are exposed (Samuel, 1959). This means that having
a specific goal, such as minimizing number of mis-
ses, and a set of rules that define what is a miss or
a hit, will enable computers to adjust their decisions
based on their experiences. This learning process
requires a large amount of data that can be used for
training. When properly trained, AI is able to make
accurate decisions with newly presented similar data,
and adjust its behavior when necessary (Brynjolfsson
& Mitchell, 2017). However, the training process may
introduce unintended bias via the features of the
data, the algorithm, or the data –algorithm interac-
tion (Danks & London, 2017).
There are two important assumptions in machine
learning: First, while the goal is being established by
the programmer (for instance, to minimize misses vs.
maximize hits), the specific calculations that lead
computers to the decision are based on the data and are
mostly unknown. Second, the computers are able to use
data to a greater extent than humans, and may therefore
achieve better results than humans (Brynjolfsson &
Mitchell, 2017). For example, consider Arthur Samuel,
one of the pioneers of machine learning, who taught
a computer program to play c heckers (Frantz, 2003).
His goal was to teach it to play checkers better than
himself, which was not something he could program
explicitly. Samuel used a large number of annotated
games, with the good moves distinguished from the bad
ones, and a Guide to Checkers to adjust the criteria for
choosing moves, so that the program would choose
those moves thought to be good by checker experts as
often as possible. In 1962, Samuel’s program beat the
checkers champion of the state of Connecticut, who
was the fourth in the nation, as it was able to play
checkers better than its programmer (McCarthy &
Feigenbaum, 1990). Even though the program was ap-
plying preprogrammed rules, it learned to play better
than its creator, making decisions in a better way than
the programmer could, which is a key difference be-
tween prior generations of technology (which were
limited by the knowledge of the programmer) and AI.
Considering the unique qualities of AI technology,
it is important to address the difference between
AI and automation, as these terms are often used in-
terchangeably (e.g., Lee & See, 2004). Automation
refers to the situation where computers follow pre-
programmed rules to perform repetitive and mono-
tonic tasks that were previously performed by humans
(Parasuraman & Riley, 1997). The behavior pro-
duced by traditional automation and its outcomes
are preprogrammed and well understood. Tradi-
tional automation is deterministic and does not in-
clude any learning processes (e.g., Raj & Seamans,
2019). However, automation can be enabled by AI,
which means that machine learning algorithms make
the rules that the automated process follows, and
they also learn and adjust based on experience and
feedback. Consequently, automation plays a role in
carrying out the actions determined by an intelligent
system, and thus this review includes research that
examines trust in intelligent, AI-enabled automation.
The specific, technical details of AI are beyond the
scope of this review; our focus is on reviewing exist-
ing empirical research related to users ’ perceptions
and tendencies to trust or not trust AI technology.
TRUST AND INTEGRATION OF AI
IN ORGANIZATIONS
Early work on the acceptance and use of new
technology in organizations tended to focus on user
reactions to technological features. For example, the
Technology Acceptance Model (TAM; Davis, 1989)
emphasizes perceived usefulness (the degree to which
a potential user believes that technology will help to
perform a task) and ease of use (the perceived utility
of the effort to use the new technology) as the main
determinants of users ’ attitudes and behavioral in-
tention to use and accept the system (Davis, 1989).
More recent approaches have further added the con-
cept of trust as a predictor of technology acceptance
(Ghazizadeh, Lee, & Boyle, 2012; Hoff & Bashir, 2015;
Lee & See, 2004; Pavlou, 2003).
A focus on issues of trust allows us to address not only
the disuse (a rejection) of technology but also its misuse
(an inappropriate overreliance on technology) or its
abuse (harmful use to achieve an individual gain;
Parasuraman & Riley, 1997). Trust can predict the level
of reliance on technology, whereas the level of corre-
spondence between user’s trust and the technology ’s
capabilities, known as calibration, can influence the
actual outcomes of technology use. Low trust in highly
capable technology would lead to disuse and high costs
in terms of lost time and work efficiency, as well as
2020 629Glikson and Woolley

--- PDF PAGE 4 ---
possible abuse, whereas high trust in incapable tech-
nology would lead to over-trust and misuse, which in
turn may cause a breach of safety and other undesirable
outcomes (Hoff & Bashir, 2015; Lee & See, 2004).
One of the most cited definitions of trust was sug-
gested by Mayer, Davis, and Schoorman (1995), who
argued that trust is“the willingness of a party to be vul-
nerable to the actions of another party based on the ex-
pectation that the other will perform a particular action
important to the trustor, irrespective of the ability to
monitor or control that other party” (Mayer, Davis, &
Schoorman, 1995, p. 712). This definition emphasizes
a willingness to be vulnerable and the importance of the
actions at stake, and does not limit the concept of trust to
human–human interaction, allowing us to consider trust
with regard to technology, including AI (Wang, Qiu,
Kim, & Benbasat, 2016). Although definitions in other
literatures incorporate some different assumptions,
such as socially embedded properties of human or
institutional relations, the conceptualization of trust
as a tendency to take a meaningful risk while believ-
ing in a high chance of positive outcome is common
across different disciplines (Hoff & Bashir, 2015;
Rousseau, Sitkin, Burt, & Camerer, 1998).
Trust is particularly relevant to the human –AI re-
lationships because of the perceived risk embedded in
them, due to the complexity and nondeterminism of AI
behaviors, and its future role in the workplace. AI is
perceived as technology that slowly will take over dif-
ferent types of (currently) human jobs as well as funda-
mentally transform the structure of organizations (Davis,
2019). It is still not clear whether low-skilled and low-
cost employees, such as frontline service representa-
tives, are at a higher risk of being replaced by AI (Huang &
Rust, 2018; Pfeffer, 2018; Wirtz et al., 2018) than
knowledge workers and top-level managers who
rely on analytical and rational knowledge process-
ing, and whose high cost makes their replacement
financially attractive (Ferr `as-Hern´andez, 2018;
Loebbecke & Picot, 2015) . In the present, some “hu-
man” tasks are already being performed by AI
(Brynjolfsson & Mitchell, 2017). Analyzing tasks across
almost 1,000 occupations, Brynjolfsson et al. (2018)
found that most occupations in most industries have at
least some tasks that could be replaced by AI (suitable
for machine learning). However, there is no occupation
in which all the current tasks could be replaced
(Brynjolfsson et al., 2018). That being said, there is also
no disagreement that the labor force will go through
a dramatic change, with some jobs disappearing and
new jobs being created (Faraj, Pachidi, & Sayegh, 2018).
Trust is a dynamic concept that is prone to changes
based on the behavior of the trusted agent (Crisp &
Jarvenpaa, 2013; Schoorman, Mayer, & Davis, 2007).
Hoff and Bashir (2015) posited that the way trust in
technology unfolds differs from the way it develops in
humans because of the common positivity bias toward
new technologies (Parasuraman & Manzey, 2010). In
contrast to the low trust that exists initially between
unfamiliar humans, new technologies may produce
unrealistically optimistic beliefs regarding their abilities
and functionality (Dzindolet, Peterson, Pomranky,
Pierce, & Beck, 2003). Thus, although trust in humans
generally increases with time through frequent in-
teractions, trust in technology decreases with time,
based on encounters with errors and malfunctions
(Madhavan & Wiegmann, 2007). However, the opposite
also could be true when it comes to AI. Pointing out the
widespread skepticism associated with the immaturity
of existing AI (Hengstler, Enkel, & Duelli, 2016) and the
difficulties associated withthe acceptance of new tech-
nologies (Leonardi, 2009), some researchers suggest
that low level of trust from an initial encounter may
increase following a direct interaction (Ullman &
Malle, 2017). In this review, we address the dynamic
nature of trust by discussing the trajectory over which
trust develops for users interacting with different AI
representations. We also examine the AI features that
facilitate the development of trust, such as tangibility,
transparency, reliability, and immediacy behaviors;
the context of the task being performed; and the role of
machine intelligence in moderating the impact of
experience with AI on human trust.
Much of the extant organizational research has con-
sidered trust to be a cognitive construct that involves
rational evaluation of the trustee and situational features
(Schoorman et al., 2007). However, trust might also be
influenced by irrational factors, such as emotions and
mood (Komiak & Benbasat,2006). McAllister (1995) re-
ferred to the latter as emotion-driven or affect-based
trust, suggesting that in inte rpersonal relationships,
people develop social connections that provide support
and comfort—in addition to cognitive trust that is based
on perceptions of trustee reliance and competence. The
emotional trust between human coworkers differs from
cognitive trust not only in its antecedents but also in its
behavioral consequences (Jones & George, 1998; Ng &
Chua, 2006). Recognizing the differences between trust
in humans and trust in technology, Hoff and Bashir
(2015) argued that for understanding the adoption of
a complex new technology, it is essential to address
emotion-driven trust. The use of unknown sophisticated
technology, such as AI, suggests a need for a “leap of
faith” (Hoff & Bashir, 2015; Lee & See, 2004) and trust in
processes that cannot be directly observed or cognitively
understood. Therefore, in this review, we address
630 JulyAcademy of Management Annals

--- PDF PAGE 5 ---
empirical research that examined both cognitive and
emotional trust in AI.
BUILDING COGNITIVE TRUST IN AI
Research on human trust attests to the importance
of an object’s representation and tangibility for estab-
lishing trust, and the extant research on AI also sup-
ports this notion (Kr ¨amer, Lucas, Schmitt, & Gratch,
2017; Lee, Jung, Kim, & Kim, 2006; Li, 2015). However,
research that addresses more than one type of AI
representation (such as physical robot vs.v i r t u a l
bot) is rare, as different disciplines tend to focus on
a specific type of representation. At the same time,
similar representations are often studied by several
disciplines. For instance, researchers in robotics
and human factors mostly study trust in robots,
whereas researchers in information systems, mar-
keting, and human –computer interactions study
trust in recommendation agents. Thus, organizing
a review by field of study would not be helpful.
Taking a user-centered approach and embracing
the physical embodiment notion that addresses the
physical representation of AI (Lee et al., 2006a), we
organize the review based on the way AI is presented
to human users, separating between AI-enabled ro-
bots, AI-enabled virtual agents, and embedded AI.
Reviewing the research across disciplines that are
relevant to each representation, we directly address
the role of AI representation.
As argued previously, trust could be both cogni-
tive (based on rational thinking) and emotional
(based on affect; McAl lister, 1995), and as these
types of trust might differ in their antecedents, we
discuss their development separately.
2 Therefore,
we start by discussing the dimensions influencing
cognitive trust within each physical representation,
such as tangibility, transparency, and reliability; task
characteristics; and immediacy behaviors, with the
latter reflecting the special interactive abilities of AI.
In each section, we present an overview of the find-
ings, the trajectory of trust, and review extant research
on each dimension relevant to each type of technol-
ogy representation (robotic, virtual, or embedded).
When researchers examine cognitive trust in AI,
they measure it as a function of whether users are
willing to take factual information or advice and act on
it, as well as whether they see the technology as help-
ful, competent, or useful. Based on prior research that
examined trust in technology (Hancock et al., 2011;
Hoff & Bashir, 2015; Lee & See, 2004), we organize
the review of cognitive trust in AI by addressing the
dimensions that were found to influence trust. We
start each section by discussing the trajectory of
trust as is evident in the reviewed research and the
s p e c i f i cr o l eo fA Itangibility , that is, its capability of
being perceived or touched, in developing trust. An
overview of our conclusions can be found in Table 1
and Figure 1.
Transparency reflects the level to which the un-
derlying operating rules and inner logics of the tech-
nology are apparent to the users and is considered to
be critical for developing trust in new technology
(Hoff & Bashir, 2015). It is more problematic for AI
than other technologies, especially when methods
such as deep learning are involved. An important
aspect of transparency includes different types of
explanations regarding how AI works or why a spe-
cific decision was made that are understandable to
users, even when they have little technical knowl-
edge. The review focuses on the studied implications
of these explanations for cognitive trust.
Reliability , or exhibiting the same and expected
behavior over time, is also critical to technology
trustworthiness (Hoff & Bashir, 2015). In the case of
AI, reliability is often difficult to assess, especially
in the context of high machine intelligence, as learn-
ing from data can lead technology to exhibit different
behavior, even if the underlying objective function
remains the same. As our review reveals, the relation-
ship between AI reliability and trust is less straight-
forward in high versus low intelligence technologies
and varies across AI representations.
Technologies are believed to be more efficient
in some tasks than in others and, therefore, task
characteristics related to the work the technology
is performing, such as whether it deals with largely
technical or interpersonal judgments, could be an
important antecedent for cognitive trust in AI
(Hancock et al., 2011). High machine intelligence
not only improves the performance of AI in tradi-
tional technology-related tasks but also increases
the range of tasks that could be performed by tech-
nology. As the range of tasks AI can perform keeps
growing, the role of task characteristics in de-
veloping cognitive trust becomes more complex
and less stable.
2 It is important to note that in many cases, researchers
did not make a clear distinction regarding the type of trust
in AI they study; we inferred this distinction based on the
context of the study, trust antecedents, and trust measures.
When the studied mechanism was based on affect or
emotions, we categorized it as emotional trust, and when it
was based on cognition or rationality, as cognitive trust.
2020 631Glikson and Woolley

--- PDF PAGE 6 ---
High machine intelligence that allows the tech-
nology to interact with the environment and be re-
sponsive to users has introduced a variety of AI
immediacy behaviors.Immediacyhas been defined as
the degree of perceived physical and/or psychological
closeness between people (Mehrabian, 1967). Imme-
diacy behaviors refer to socially oriented gestures
intended to increase interpersonal closeness, such as
proactivity, active listening, and responsiveness. These
behaviors are perceived as signs of machine intelli-
gence and influence cognitive trust by raising the ex-
pectations of high-quality performance and positive
experience during mutual work.
Cognitive Trust in Robotic AI
AI-enabled robots may have a variety of functions
and capabilities as well as different mechanical or
human-like representations; they could be physically
present or distantly located and perform mechani-
cal or socially oriented tasks. Based on the extant re-
search, this review focuses on interactions with
physically present robots, addressing remote robots
only with regard to transparency and task character-
istics. The initial trust in robotic AI is relatively low;
therefore, factors such as reliability, transparency, and
characteristics of the task could play an important role
in developing trust. Nevertheless, it seems that a much
TABLE 1
Main Effects of Dimensions on Cognitive Trust in AI, Organized by Representation
Dimensions Robotic AI Virtual AI Embedded AI
Tangibility Physical presence increases trust:
More trust in robotic AI than in
virtual AI.
Visual presence increases trust:
More trust in virtual AI than in
embedded AI.
The effect of awareness on the use of
AI is not clear.
Selected
references
Bainbridge et al. (2011), Lee, Peng, Jin,
& Yan (2006), Salem et al. (2015),
Shinozawa et al. (2005)
Chattaraman et al. (2014), Mumm &
Mutlu (2011)
Eslami et al. (2015)
Transparency Transparency might increase trust, but
the empirical research is scant.
Transparency of AI reliability and
explanations of how algorithm
works increase trust.
Transparency of how algorithm works
increases trust; especially needed
for highly intelligent managerial
systems.
Selected
references
Sanders et al. (2014) Fan et al. (2008), Wang & Benbasat
(2007), Wang et al. (2016)
Alan et al. (2014), Chao et al. (2016),
Dietvorst et al. (2016), Dzindolet
et al. (2003), Kizilcec (2016), Lee,
Kusbit, Metsky, & Dabbish (2015),
M ¨ohlmann & Zalmanson (2017)
Reliability Low reliability decreases trust, but not
always: When robot is perceived as
having high machine intelligence,
people tend to follow even a faulty robot.
Low reliability mostly decreases trust
in laboratory and field studies
where the initial trust was very high.
Low reliability significantly decreases
trust, and the way to restore trust is
difficult and takes time.
Selected
references
Bainbridge et al. (2011), Desai et al.
(2012), Freedy et al. (2007), Robinette
et al. (2016), Salem et al. (2015)
Fan et al. (2008); Glass et al. (2008);
Moran et al. (2013)
Dietvorst et al. (2015); Dzindolet et al.
(2003); Manzey et al. (2012)
Task
characteristics
In technical tasks the trust is higher
than in tasks that require social
intelligence.
In technical tasks that require data
analysis, trust in AI is higher than
in humans.
In tasks that require social
intelligence, the trust in humans
is higher than in AI; high self-
confidence moderates the trust in AI.
Selected
references
Gaudiello et al. (2016), Gombolay et al.
(2015)
Ramchurn et al. (2016) Dietvorst et al. (2016), Logg et al.
(2018)
Immediacy
behaviors
Responsiveness, adaptiveness, and
pro-social behaviors increase trust.
Personalization and use of persuasion
tactics increase trust.
Personalization improves trust;
constant tracking of workers ’
behaviors may decrease trust.
Selected
references
Baraglia et al. (2016), De Visser &
Parasuraman (2011), Hoffman &
Breazeal (2007), Oistad et al. (2016)
Andrews (2012), Fenster et al. (2012),
Komiak & Benbasat (2006)
Dzindolet et al. (2003), Lee et al.
(2015), Matz et al. (2017),
M ¨ohlmann & Zalmanson (2017)
632 JulyAcademy of Management Annals

--- PDF PAGE 7 ---
more important role is being played by the level of
machine intelligence that allows robots to engage in
a variety of behaviors that increase immediacy, such
as responsiveness to users.
Trust Trajectory
Extant research addressing the trajectory of human
trust in robotic AI suggests that the initial trust starts
at a low level and develops over time, as depicted in
Figure 1. This means that trust in robotic AI develops
in a manner that is similar to trust in humans and
increases following direct interaction (Haring, Silvera-
Tawil, Watanabe, & Velonaki, 2016; Ullman & Malle,
2017). For instance, Waytz, Heafner, and Epley (2014)
found that participants who drove a car that was par-
tially autonomous reported higher trust in its abilities
than participants without such experience. Bartneck,
Suzuki, Kanda, and Nomura (2006) noted that a short
interaction with a robotic pet significantly improved
the overall attitude toward robots. Even for children,
a hands-on experience with an automated robot was
found to increase trust more than other activities, such
as watching a video that explained the robot’s abilities
(Rossi, Holthaus, Dautenhahn, Koay, & Walters, 2018).
Additional evidence for low initial trust in robotic
AI is observed in both laboratory and field studies.
For instance, Ullman and Malle (2017) tested the way
people trust a small robotic vehicle capable of gener-
ating and adjusting its paths. The researchers com-
pared a condition in which the robot was autonomous
and performed required adjustments without any hu-
man involvement to a condition in which, to activate
the adjustment, participants had to push a button. They
found that participants reported higher cognitive trust
in the robot they controlled. Furthermore, following
this controlled experience of involvement, partic-
ipants expressed signifi cantly higher trust in po-
tential future robots (Ullman & Malle, 2017).
In field studies, robots were also treated with great
suspicion and low initial trust. Importantly, low initial
trust does not necessarily lead to a lack of use but can
be translated into a misuse of technology, especially in
real-life situations. For example, Andrist, Bohus, Yu,
and Horvitz (2016) conducted a field study in which
they analyzed human–robot interactions in a lobby of
an office building. The robot ’s goal was to provide
directions to different building areas, such as eleva-
tors, in response to users ’ requests. Analyzing the
videotaped interactions across several days, re-
searchers reported that 81 percent of the interactions
were playful, with no real intent to get directions. In
the next stage, the robot was programmed to respond
to a playful approach, such as laughter, with a direct
question regarding the intent of the user. Researchers
found that only 15 percent of users admitted to mis-
using the robot, whereas others insisted that they
were truly asking for the robot ’s assistance (Andrist
et al., 2016). Despite users denying being playful,
their actual use of a robot has the potential to teach
about its abilities and build trust.
As the level of machine intelligence of robotic AI
increases, it becomes capable of engaging in greater
immediacy behaviors. As a result of the robot ’s en-
gagement in such human-like behaviors, users ’ ini-
tial trust steeply increases and leads to greater
user compliance with the robot ’s directives. Al-
though users may perceive this compliance as reci-
procity, the observed tendency to cede control to
a robot, even when the latter demonstrates erroneous
FIGURE 1
Trajectories of Trust for Robotic, Virtual, and Embedded AI as Reflected by Most of the Reviewed Studies
Trust trajectories
High Trust
Low Trust
Moderating Effect of the
Level of Machine Intelligence
Robotic AI
Virtual AI
Embedded AI
Threshold of use
Time 1 Time 2
2020 633Glikson and Woolley

--- PDF PAGE 8 ---
function, is worrisome. We will discuss the issue of
compliance despite a robot ’s erroneous behavior in
the section on reliability.
Tangibility
One of the main factors that is known to influence
initial trust is the robot ’s actual tangible physical
presence (for a review, see Li, 2015). For instance,
Bainbridge, Hart, Kim, and Scassellati (2011) com-
pared a physically present robot and an identical 2D
image presented on a screen. They found that par-
ticipants were quicker to respond to the physical
robot. Furthermore, testing trust by examining com-
pliance with an unusual request, the researchers found
that participants were more compliant with a physical
robot than its 2D representation.
Shinozawa, Naya, Yamato, and Kogure (2005) made
similar comparisons, using the willingness to accept
a robot’s advice as a behavioral measure of trust. They
also found higher trust in the physically present robot;
however, this was only for tasks presented in a physical
space. When the task was presented on a screen, there
was no difference between the robot and the on-screen
image conditions. These latter findings suggest that the
fit between the AI representation and the presentation of
the task may influence human trust, decreasing the
positive impact of physical presence for tasks that are
completed online.
Looije, Neerincx, and Cnossen (2010) also com-
pared a physically present robot and its 2D virtual
representation and found that the physically present
robot was significantly more trusted than its virtual
representation. However, problems with the smooth-
ness of the robot ’s movement harmed its ability to
react to the participants’ voices and drove the partic-
ipants to perceive the 2D virtual representation as
having a more social personality—b e i n gm o r ef r i e n d l y
and kind. As responsive behavior is more easily cre-
ated in an animated virtual agent than in a robot, it is
important to further evaluate the relative effect of AI’s
physical presence in comparison to virtual AI re-
sponsiveness on trust. Based on the existing research,
it seems that tangibility is more important to trust
than responsiveness, but in long-term interactions, the
prosocial, responsive behaviors could play a more
significant role.
Additional evidence for the positive effect of phys-
ical presence can be found in a study performed by
Cormier, Young, Nakane, Newman, and Durocher
(2013). Modeled after Milgram ’sc o m p l i a n c ee x p e r i -
ment, researchers asked participants to perform an
extremely boring document-sorting task in the
presence of a robot that was only able to voice such
phrases as “please continue doing the task. ” The ro-
bot had significantly less effect on participants ’ be-
havior than a human facilitator, yet 48 percent of
participants followed the robot ’s request and con-
tinued the task, while openly voicing their boredom
and dissatisfaction.
Existing research shows that it is not only the
physical presence that influences cognitive trust but
also a robot ’s physical appearance. For instance, re-
searchers found that robot appearance is often
interpreted by users as signaling the level of robot
intelligence, and even influences moral judgments,
so that human-like robots are expected to make hu-
man-like moral decisions, in contrast to robots with
a mechanical appearance (Malle, Scheutz, Forlizzi,
& Voiklis, 2016). Interestingly, human-likeness is not
always associated with perceptions of higher in-
telligence. Carlson, Sweet, Rhizor, Poston, Lucas,
and Feil-seifer (2015) examined the impact of a co-
operation-oriented team activity on perceptions of
a team member robot. They found that the team-
building activity improved the perception of the ro-
bot’s anthropomorphism but not the perception of
the robot’s level of intelligence.
Transparency
Despite an extensive focus on the importance of al-
gorithm transparency for cognitive trust, the existing
research on the role of transparency for trust in robotic
AI is very limited and mostly relates to robots that
work in remote locations, focusing on the need for
shared awareness (Chen & Barnes, 2014; Stubbs,
Wettergreen, & Hinds, 2007). Extant research pro-
vides only general support for the positive effect of
constant information flow on cognitive trust in ro-
bots (Sanders, Wixon, Schafer, Chen, & Hancock,
2014). Future research must address this gap and
test the effect of transparency for both remote and
collocated robots.
Reliability
An increase in trust following interaction usually
suggests highly reliable performance. Interestingly,
we could find only a few studies that examined the
direct impact of reliability of AI-enabled robots on
trust. For instance, Robinette, Howard, and Wagner
(2017) showed in several studies that in high-risk
situations participants lost trust in the advice of
a robot that made a mistake. However, different fac-
tors may significantly moderate the relationship
634 JulyAcademy of Management Annals

--- PDF PAGE 9 ---
between a robot ’s failure and subsequent human
trust. For instance, Desai, Kaniarasu, Medvedev,
Steinfeld, and Yanco (2013) examined the moder-
ating effect of the timing of a robot ’sf a i l u r e .T h e y
found that early drops in reliability lowered real-
time trust more than later drops. Freedy, DeVisser,
Weltman, and Coeyman (2007) reported similar re-
sults connecting the early failures to the first impres-
sion regarding the robot ’s capabilities. However,
comparing three different levels of the robot ’sr e -
liability across several trials, researchers also found
that experience with a low reliability robot increased
trust, even though the robot was consistently fail-
ing. Working with inconsistent reliability (i.e.,
a medium level of reliability) was more confusing
to the participants, and their trust in this condition
was lower than in the low reliability condition.
Some level of caution should be exercised in gen-
eralizing these findings, however, as the study had
only 12 participants. It is important for ongoing
research to examine whether these results would
replicate in a large sample and if reliability is more
important for trust in robotic AI than the quality of
its performance.
A high level of machine intelligence allows AI-
enabled robots not only to assist humans in a variety
of tasks but also to engage in managerial activities that
exert some control over users’ behavior, such as task
allocation, task instructions, or guidance. Reviewing
studies in which robots played a semi-managerial
role reveals that a robot’s reliability could play a less
important role for human trust and compliance than
previously assumed. For instance, Salem, Lakatos,
Amirabdollahian, and Dautenhahn (2015) found that
people followed a human-like robot ’s instructions
even when they witnessed its erroneous behavior.
The faulty behavior had a significant impact on par-
ticipants’ perceptions of reliability and trust; how-
ever, these perceptions did not translate into reduced
compliance. Researchers reported that 91 percent of
participants followed all robot instructions, even
the unreasonable ones, such as pouring juice on
a plant and disclosing a personal password. Simi-
larly, Robinette, Howard, and Wagner (2015) and
Robinette, Li, Allen, Howard, and Wagner (2016)
found that people tend to follow a robot ’s lead in an
emergency situation, even when its prior behavior
indicates a serious malfunction.
Despite the obvious limitations regarding the ex-
ternal validity of these laboratory-based studies, in-
cluding the short-term interactions and low actual
risk involved (even in the emergency scenario it is
not clear to what extent the participant actually felt
danger), the tendency to follow a highly intelligent
robotic AI, even when its’ actions are questionable, is
worrisome and requires more research. We will fur-
ther discuss the aspects of robots ’ erroneous behav-
ior in the section on emotional trust.
Task Characteristics
Looking into the effect of task characteristics on
trusting behavior, Gaudiello, Zibetti, Lefort, Chetouani,
and Ivaldi (2016) measu red the extent to which
participants were willin g to change their answers
following a robot’s advice. Researchers used functional
questions, such as an evaluation of objects ’ weight,
color, and sound, and questions of a social nature re-
garding the importance of different objects in social
scenery, such as a public pool. All cases presented
uncertain situations in which any answer could be
correct, whereas the human-like robot provided ad-
vice that was always the opposite of the participant’s
opinion. Results indicate that people conform with
the robot more readily on functional issues than on
social issues; however, the effect size was small, and
the overall rate of accepting the robot’sa d v i c eo na n y
issue was low (significantly lower than 50 percent).
In the area of team interpersonal dynamics,
Martelaro, Jung, and Hinds (2015) tested the willing-
ness of participants to cooperate with a robot ’si n -
tervention into team conflict. The robot was designed
to intervene when one of the team members (a con-
federate) became very rude. The task of the robot was
to restore appropriate communication and avoid de-
terioration of the conflict. The researchers found, in
contrast to what was expected, that the robot ’si n -
tervention made the existence of conflict more visi-
ble to the team members.
Gombolay, Gutierrez, Clarke, Sturla, and Shah (2015)
tested the effects of shared decision-making au-
thority in human –robot and human-only teams in
a manufacturing setting. They found that although
people value human teammates more than robotic
teammates, they trusted the robot’s ability to schedule
tasks and manage the workflow. Thus, for a task that
requires complex analysis and optimization to reach
an effective flow of actions, participants tend to cede
their control and authority to the robot, demonstrating
high trust. As robots gain more capabilities related to
facilitating or even managing team dynamics, it is
important to note that for human users to trust and
accept a robot’s actions, the task allocated to the robot
should be well matched to its actual abilities.
These studies demonstrate the importance of
the task for developing cognitive trust in a robot,
2020 635Glikson and Woolley

--- PDF PAGE 10 ---
emphasizing the benefits of tasks that involve com-
plex calculations and technological abilities versus
tasks with social features. These findings are con-
sistent with the MABA-HABA ( “Machines Are Bet-
ter At vs. Humans Are Better At ”) framework that
signifies the actions in which machines have signif-
icant advantages over humans, such as objective
calculations (Bradshaw, Feltovich, & Johnson, 2011;
de Winter & Dodou, 2014; Lee, 2018).
Nevertheless, as a robot ’s level of machine intelli-
gence increases, so does the ability to demonstrate
responsive, prosocial behaviors, which raises the
expectation that robots will be able to fill more
social roles, such as companionship. Strohkorb-
Sebo, Traeger, Jung, and Sc assellati (2018) exam-
ined the effect of a robot ’s disclosed vulnerability
on team dynamics and collaboration. Playing the
role of a team facilitator, a humanoid (i.e., human-
like) robot was designed to make comments on the
team’s progress during task performance. The robot’s
tactical expressions were compared with more emo-
tional, encouraging or disappointed expressions.
When the robot’s behavior was more emotional, team
m e m b e r sw e r em o r ea c t i v ei nr e d u c i n gt e n s i o nw h e n
they made mistakes and exhibited more trust-building
behaviors. As discussed in the previous section with
respect to pro-social but low reliability robots, as ro-
botic AI behavior becomes human-like, it becomes
easier for users to trust and follow them, regardless of
the exact task (and the level of reliability). Future re-
search must address the moderating role of task char-
acteristics on the effect of machine intelligence and
social behaviors in building cognitive trust, not only in
laboratory studies but also in field settings. It is pos-
sible that at a workplace, in contrast to a laboratory,
trust in a highly intelligent robot would still depend on
the nature of the tasks being performed.
Immediacy Behaviors
Incorporating higher levels of machine intelligence
has enabled robots to react to human presence and
speech, creating“social-robots,” interactive assistants
that are able to serve in roles such as an interactive
museum guide, team member, or social companion
(Bickmore, Pfeifer, & Schulman, 2011; Hinds, Roberts,
& Jones, 2004; Zhang, Kaber, Zhu, Swangnetr, Mosaly,
& Hodge, 2010). Interestingly, while paying less at-
tention to robots’ reliability, researchers have explored
the effect of different robots ’ behaviors on human
trust. Overall, the findings indicate that as the level of
machine intelligence increases, users expect robots
to be more proactive and adaptive. Behaviors that
enhance users’ experienced immediacy, such as so-
cial gestures, are generally helpful, and their mere
presence seems to affect human behavior and bring
about compliance with a robot’s requests, even when
robots exhibit mistakes in their behavior. Faulty be-
havior can reduce trust, but, at least in the short term,
compliance continues.
Baraglia, Cakmak, Nagai, Rao, and Asada (2016)
examined two different autonomous forms of robotic
behavior—reactive and proactive. The goal of the
robot was to assist participants in the performance of
a sequence of tasks. The reactive robot provided
help only after the participant failed in timely task
performance. The proactive robot detected partici-
pants’ movements, was able to anticipate possible
failures, and initiated help before a task was com-
pleted. Comparing these conditions and a condition
in which the robot was used as a tool (i.e., operating
at a low level of intelligence and activated by a human’s
request for help), researchers found that the partici-
pants not only performed better in the proactive than
in the reactive robot condition but also reported that
they preferred the proactive robot over the one acting
as a tool. Other studies provided similar results.
Hoffman and Breazeal (2007) compared teamwork
with reactive and proactive robots, where the pro-
active robot was programmed to anticipate specific
behaviors. They found that people liked the proactive
robot more and rated it as a more productive team
member.
Directly examining the perceptions of trust, de
Visser and Parasuraman (2011) compared stable and
adaptive levels of robot autonomy. In the stable con-
dition, the robot always provided assistance, needed
or not, whereas in the adaptive condition, the help
was provided only for difficult tasks. The level of in-
tervention had no effect on participants’ performance;
however, participants reported higher trust in the
adaptively automated robot. Participants appreciated
the ability of the robotic assistant to initiate helping
behavior in the appropriate situations and reported
higher levels of self-confidence and lower levels of
workload when working in the adaptive condition. It
seems that timing and fit to the situation may facilitate
trust, perhaps because of their connection to per-
ceived higher level of robot machine intelligence.
Oistad, Sembroski, Gates, Krupp, Fraune, and
ˇSabanovi ´c (2016) examined the effect of a robot ’s
social-oriented behaviors on users ’ perceptions and
physical proximity to the robot during a box moving
task. They found that robot ’su s e r - o r i e n t e di m m e -
diacy gestures, such as approaching the user and
nodding toward him/her when in proximity, had
636 JulyAcademy of Management Annals

--- PDF PAGE 11 ---
a positive impact on users ’ perceptions of robot ’s
anthropomorphism. Furthermore, social gestures
decreased the sense of physical risk, and partici-
pants kept less distance from the higher immediacy
robot than the robot that did not demonstrate these
behaviors.
In addition to immediacy behaviors executed by ro-
bots, researchers addressed some intervening behaviors
that can improve human trust. For instance, Carlson
et al. (2015) demonstrated thata team-building activity
increases trust in a robotic team member. By contrast,
You and Robert (2019) found that what increased
trust in a robot was not a stronger sense of a team but
an activity in which participants assembled their
robot. Researchers sug gested that the act of robot
assembly increased trust and made the participants
identify more with their robotic team member.
However, the differences in these experiments
could also be driven by the assumed machine in-
telligence of the robots. In the Carlson et al. (2015)
experiment, the robot was engaged in a complex
search activity and, thus, had assumed a high ma-
chine intelligence; it was in reality operated remotely
in a “Wizard of Oz” methodology (i.e., a human was
actually controlling the report, unbeknownst to par-
ticipants), yet participants perceived it as a highly
intelligent, autonomously functioning robot. By con-
trast, in You and Robert’s (2019) experiment, the robot
had the role of a water carrier, and, thus, its assumed
level of machine intelligence was low. Therefore, it
seems that the perceived level of machine intelligence
moderates not only the steepness of the trust trajec-
tory but also the activities and psychological percep-
tions that lead to cognitive trust.
Cognitive Trust in Virtual AI
An AI-enabled virtual agent is a representation in
which AI has no physical presence, but a distinguished
identity, such as a chatbot or an avatar (Ben Mimoun,
Poncin, & Garnier, 2012). Virtual representation may
exist on any electronic device, and may possess fea-
tures such as a face, body, voice, or the ability to text.
Despite being already in commercial use, much of the
existing empirical research focuses on the aspects of
the interface design, paying less attention to such fac-
tors as level of machine intelligence.
Trust Trajectory
The trust trajectory of virtual AI suggests that high
initial trust decreases following an interaction (Hoff
& Bashir, 2015). This trajectory differs from trust
development in robotic AI (see Figure 1) and is evi-
dent in both laboratory and field studies. For instance,
de Visser et al. (2017) found that in an initial stage of
the experiment, participants trusted the advice of
virtual AI more than human advice, yet with time (and
following decreasing reliability), this trust decreased
much more than the trust in a human adviser. Exam-
ining the field evidence of the effect of virtual agents,
Ben Mimoun et al. (2012) analyzed their use in com-
mercial websites and found that despite the initial
interest in their use, over the years their actual use had
significantly decreased. Based on interviews and the
fact that this problem was specific to virtual agents,
researchers suggested that the lack of calibration be-
tween an agent’s representation and its actual level of
machine intelligence led to customers’ frustration and
abandonment. Human-like representation of AI may
lead to users ’ expectations of a high-level machine
intelligence, which in many cases does not fit the
technological reality (Ben Mimoun et al., 2012).
Interestingly, this trajectory can be reversed, with
some evidence for low initial trust in virtual AI.
Similar to observations made with robotic AI in a field
study (Andrist et al., 2016), research found that in
some cases, the initial trust in field settings could be
low and lead to an agent ’s misuse and negative be-
havior. For example, Kopp, Gesellensetter, Kr ¨amer,
and Wachsmuth (2005) analyzed the interaction of
museum visitors with a virtual guide. Examining
more than 200 conversations, researchers noted that
although most of the visitors tended to greet the vir-
tual agent and 20 percent tested the system by asking
direct and indirect questions regarding its abilities, 11
percent of the interactions were negative, including
insults and abusive and negative language.
In addition, there is some evidence of relatively low
initial trust that increases following an interaction.
Wang et al. (2016), who examined different types
of recommendation agents, found that the firsthand
experience with a reliable recommendation agent
increased participants ’ trust in comparison to the
thirdhand experience. This suggests that when virtual
AI has high machine intelligence and is highly func-
tional, similar to the case of robotic AI, direct in-
teraction can increase the initial trust.
To explain the differences of trust trajectories in
virtual AI, researchers suggest addressing the cali-
bration between users ’ expectations and virtual AI
performance. Features of virtual AI, such as visuali-
zation, and especially anthropomorphism, may sig-
nificantly increase users ’ expectations, whereas the
actual level of AI machine intelligence moderates the
direction of the trust trajectory. When agents with
2020 637Glikson and Woolley

--- PDF PAGE 12 ---
low machine intelligence are paired with human-
like representations, the users are more likely to start
with high expectations and experience a trust de-
crease. By contrast, virtual agents with high machine
intelligence can engage in higher immediacy be-
haviors, which facilitates a positive trust trajectory.
Tangibility
The existing research supports the notion that the
visual presence of human-like or animal-like virtual
AI agents increases initial cognitive trust in com-
parison to a lack of visualization. This means that
tangibility has a positive effect on cognitive trust
in AI, similar to its effect on robotic AI. Examining
the effect of a visually present agent, Chattaraman,
Kwon, Gilbert, and Li (2014) found that adding an
avatar’s picture on a shopping website increased
participants’ trust and intention to visit the website
again. Similarly, Mumm and Mutlu (2011) found that
when feedback for a categorization task was pro-
duced by an agent (in the form of a robotic picture),
participants reported higher intrinsic motivation in
contrast to the condition without explicit visualiza-
tion. However, Wang et al. (2016) argued that visu-
alization mostly influences the emotional trust and
not cognitive trust, as it has less impact on the per-
ception of usefulness. In their study, Wang et al.
(2016) manipulated the presence of a visual agent
and the presence of a detailed explanation of the
agent’s recommendation and found that the agent ’s
transparency had a greater effect on cognitive trust
than adding a visual representation.
Transparency
One way to moderate unrealistically high ex-
pectations from users is to provide an explana-
tion regarding virtual AI functionality. Exploring
the role of transparency in facilitating trust in AI,
Pieters (2011) suggested a distinction between
explanation-for-trust and explanation-for-confi-
dence. Pieters argued that confidence could be seen
as a reliance on technology without considering al-
ternatives, whereas trust requires comparison be-
tween different options. Explanation-for-trust
addresses the way the system works, the “how”
question, by revealing details of its internal opera-
tions. By contrast, explanation-for-confidence
makes the user feel comfortable in using the system
by providing information about its external com-
munications, explaining “why” an algorithm should
be used.
In building on this distinction, Wang and Benbasat
(2007) looked at the recommendations of virtual
agents and manipulated the transparency of the al-
gorithm by providing explanations about why and
how the agent made its decision, and what the al-
ternatives were. Consistent with Pieters (2011), they
found that the explanation for how a decision was
made influenced consumers ’ beliefs in the compe-
tence and benevolence of the virtual agent. The
transparency regarding the choice (i.e., why some-
thing was chosen) influenced only the perceptions of
agent benevolence. This is consistent with the extant
literature on the effect of explanations on trust for
virtual AI (see Xiao and Benbasat, 2007 for review).
An additional way in which transparency could be
helpful for establishing trust is when the reliability of
the virtual agent is transparent. For instance, Fan et al.
(2008) demonstrated that informing participants re-
garding the actual reliability of a decision-making
agent increased participants ’ trust and improved
performance. When the tra nsparent reliability was
low, participants better adjusted their decisions,
taking into consideration the agent ’s advice only
when appropriate. The ability to know when to use
the virtual agent increased the overall trustwor-
thiness of the agent.
Reliability
Reliability plays an important role in users ’ trust
and trusting behaviors in virtual AI, which differs
from robotic AI. Moran et al. (2013) examined com-
pliance with voiced agent instructions in a street
team-based game and found that compliance was
highly dependent on trust in the agent. When agent
reliability was compromised, such as when the in-
structions led to no revelation of new cues, trust
decreased, which also decreased the compliance. It
seems that experiencing (without advance knowl-
edge) a virtual AI agent’s low reliability significantly
differs in its effect on trust than simply being aware of
the possibility of low reliability. The actual experi-
ence decreases the trust, whereas the transparency
regarding AI’s possible errors may increase the trust.
Looking beyond AI reliability, researchers have sug-
gested the importance of focusing on the consistency/
inconsistency between users ’ expectations and the
actual AI performance. Factoring in the levels of ini-
tial trust allows researchers to better predict the effects
of virtual AI behavior. This mechanism was found to
explain users’ trust across different studies (Xiao &
Benbasat, 2007). Glass, McGuinness, and Wolverton
(2008) interviewed users of an office assistant agent
638 JulyAcademy of Management Annals

--- PDF PAGE 13 ---
and found that correct expectations regarding the
agent’s performance and capabilities facilitated trust
in the agent.
Task Characteristics
Virtual AI is perceived as having benefits with
respect to technical issues, such as analyzing data,
which is similar to robotic AI. Ramchurn et al. (2016)
compared human compliance with agent versus hu-
man instructions in the context of a response to a di-
saster and found that under virtual agent instructions,
the performance was better because of the agent ’s
greater capabilities of gathering information and
a clearer method of wording instructions.
Testing compliance with a virtual agent, Jiang et al.
(2014) found that a virtual agent playing the role of
game instructor was highly trusted, as its orders were
usually followed (91 percent compliance). However,
this compliance depended on whether the instruc-
tions were aligned with team dynamics. When the
v i r t u a lA Ia g e n t’s orders required a dramatic change of
team dynamic or interfered with accomplishing a dif-
ferent task, the compliance decreased to less than 40
percent. It is possible that when instructions were
interfering with the way the game was played, the
players perceived AI as less intelligent and, therefore,
less trustworthy.
High machine intelligence allows virtual AI to be
used to influence interaction between humans. For in-
stance, de Melo, Marsella, and Gratch (2017) found that
humans represented by virtual agents led people to act
more fairly toward other humans than humans without
such representation. Isbister, Nakanishi, Ishida, and
Nass (2000) found that the ability of an AI-driven agent
to match safe vs. unsafe topics for a discussion influ-
enced the cultural perceptions of American and Japa-
nese participants regardingeach other and their actual
behavior. Safe topics inc luded movies, music, and
sports, and AI-driven agents who were “safe” would
ask questions on the safe topic at any time they would
a s s e s sal o n gp a u s ei nac o n v e r s a t i o n .A n“unsafe
agent” asked questions on issues like politics, religion,
and money. In a“safe agent” condition, Americans felt
more trust in Japanese partners and had a more positive
perception about Japanese people in general. Japanese
students in the“safe agent” condition found Americans
to be more similar to them. Kr¨amer et al. (2017) found
that communication with an interacting agent de-
creases participants’ need to engage in social activities,
as they sought less human interaction after using AI.
Introducing AI as a team member may also influence
the interaction between people in the team, and even
alter team cognition and team communication pat-
terns (Demir, McNeese, Cooke ,B a l l ,M y e r s ,&F r i e m a n ,
2015; Demir, McNeese, & Cooke, 2017). Specifically,
Demir et al. (2017) found that human members of
t e a m sw i t ha nA I“peer” (referred to as a “synthetic
member”) made significantly fewer information ex-
changes than teams with only human members.
Immediacy Behaviors
High levels of machine intelligence allow virtual
AI to enact more immediacy behaviors that increase
trust, such as social responsiveness and personali-
zation of the virtual AI agent ’s reactions. Pro-social
virtual AI’s behaviors can be translated to perceptions
of the agent ’s personality. Andrews (2012) demon-
s t r a t e dt h a ta na g e n t’s pro-social behaviors led partic-
ipants to perceive a high level of agent agreeableness,
which was associated with higher trust in the agent.
Komiak and Benbasat (2006) manipulated the level
of personalization provided by different recom-
mendation agents, using eit her personal or general
questions asked by the agent. They found that per-
sonalization had a significant positive impact on
users’ cognitive trust.
A virtual agent ’s persuasion tactics can also be
important. Fenster, Zuckerman, and Kraus (2012)
found that an agent that provided examples was more
influential than an agent that provided justifications
and more persuasive than an agent that presented the
subject with both examples and justifications. What is
particularly intriguing about this finding is that it
suggests that the effectiveness of virtual AI persuasion
tactics could differ from tactics that typically work
well for humans, where using both examples and
justifications was found to be more effective.
Cognitive Trust in Embedded AI
Completely embedded AI is “invisible” to users,
which means that it does not have a visual repre-
sentation or a distinguished identity. It could be
embedded in different types of applications, such as
a search engine or a GPS map, and users might be not
aware of its existence. Assuming users are aware of
embedded AI, there is still an important question of
what features engender cognitive trust. Similar to
virtual AI, cognitive trust in embedded AI differs
from robotic AI in that it is more driven by its re-
liability and transparency. Similar to robotic AI, the
perceived level of expertise or machine intelligence
also plays an important role in cognitive trust, as well
as the type of task involved, as people believe that
2020 639Glikson and Woolley

--- PDF PAGE 14 ---
algorithms are better at calculation tasks than at so-
cial tasks. As the level of machine intelligence in-
creases, the contextual and user-centered factors
become more important for cognitive trust because
it becomes more difficult to assess AI reliability.
Trust Trajectory
Research assessing the trajectory of cognitive trust
in embedded AI has mostly focused on the way trust
in AI changes based on the feedback regarding its
accuracy. Many laboratory-based studies have dem-
onstrated that people tend to exhibit high initial trust
in embedded AI as an algorithmic decision-providing
software (de Visser et al., 2017; Dietvorst, Simmons, &
Massey, 2015; Manzey, Reichenbach, & Onnasch,
2012). High initial trust tends to decrease as a result
of erroneous AI function, and the process of trust
restoration requires a lot of time.
The few field studies that exist also demonstrate
high initial trust in embedded AI. For instance, re-
searchers examining the effect of wearable algorith-
mic sensors on users ’ emotions found that users
demonstrated a high level of trust in the sensors and
that their emotions were significantly influenced by
the feedback they received (Hollis, Pekurovsky, Wu,
& Whittaker, 2018). Researchers who studied the
cases of Uber and Lyft drivers also reported high
initial trust. For instance, Lee, Kusbit, Metsky, &
Dabbish (2015) tested drivers’ experience with an AI-
enabled management system and found that they
perceived the passenger –driver rating system as ef-
ficient in establishing basic trust and service atti-
tudes in the ridesharing systems. However, they also
found that low levels of transparency lead drivers to
social forums, where they could not only make sense
of the system but also gain knowledge about ways of
resisting or abusing it. M ¨ohlmann and Zalmanson
(2017) also found that while they kept using the
system, Uber drivers did not trust its managerial
decisions and engaged in a variety of actions to resist
its management, including gaming the system.
There is also evidence of low initial trust in em-
bedded AI, especially in field studies, where the
mistrust could be so high that users may refuse using
the embedded AI in the first place (Christin, 2017).
However, field studies that assess trust in embedded
AI in organizational settings are scarce. Healthcare
researchers examining how algorithmic decision
aids are being used (or not used) by physicians report
significant difficulties in acceptance of the tech-
nology in medical settings (Linkov et al., 2017;
Panella, Marchisio, & Di Stanislao, 2003). In a field
experiment on energy use, Alan, Costanza, Fischer,
Ramchurn, Rodden, and Jennings (2014) found that
participants avoided using an algorithm that was
designed to help them save on their electricity bills.
The refusal to use the technology further prevents the
hands-on experience that would increase trust. This
could explain why commercial companies are eva-
sive about their use of embedded AI (e.g., Eslami
et al., 2015). Future research must consider the role
of trust in AI within organizations to better un-
derstand the specific difficulties that need to be
tackled to facilitate its use.
Tangibility
The embedded nature of AI representation sug-
gests that people may not be aware that they are using
an algorithm-enabled application. Currently, re-
search of the impact of embedded AI on users ’
awareness on trust is very limited. In one study,
Eslami et al. (2015) surveyed Facebook users and
found that more than half of them (62 percent) were
not aware that an algorithm was managing the in-
formation that was displayed to them, making de-
cisions on what should be hidden. Learning about
the algorithm ’s way of working changed users ’ at-
tributions, perceptions, and behaviors, and overall
increased their sense of control. Revealing (or hid-
ing) the use of an algorithm may not only raise im-
portant ethical questions but also have a significant
impact on users ’ long-term trust. However, Eslami
et al. (2015) found that, despite being unpleasantly
surprised or even angry for not being informed about
the use of an algorithm, after learning how it worked,
participants kept using the platform. Future research
needs to explore the limitations for users ’ trust re-
covery in such situations, and the true cost and
benefit of users ’ awareness.
Transparency
Looking for ways to overcome the aversion driven
by technology error, researchers have examined the
role of transparency on cognitive trust. For instance,
Mohlemann and Zalmanson (2017) focused on Uber
drivers and noted that the lack of algorithm trans-
parency leads drivers to constantly guess and game
the system. Lee et al. (2015) reached a similar
conclusion.
Dzindolet et al. (2003) used explanations of the ra-
tionale behind possible mistakes made by the ma-
chine and demonstrated that such explanations had
a significant positive effect on trust. Supporting the
640 JulyAcademy of Management Annals

--- PDF PAGE 15 ---
notion of the positive effect of transparency in de-
veloping trust in AI, Chao, Chang, Wu, Lin, and Chen
(2016) found in a survey of more than 700 participants
that understanding the technological capabilities of
AI embedded in a search engine positively correlated
with reliance on the technology and belief in the us-
ability and ease of use of the technology. Although
this study did not directly assess trust in AI, its results
regarding the perceptions of low risk and high re-
liance suggest a positive relationship between ac-
knowledgement of AI capabilities and trust.
However, not all provided information has a simi-
lar effect. Helldin, Falkman, Riveiro, and Davidsson
(2013) showed that when drivers of a simulated au-
tonomous vehicle were warned about the situational
uncertainty that would lead an algorithm to err, they
reported lower trust and were quicker to retake man-
ual control over the car than participants who did not
get the warning. Kizilcec (2016) investigated trust in
an algorithmic peer-reviewing system and found that
when participants ’ expectations of their outcome
were violated, the explanation regarding how the al-
gorithm worked facilitated trust. However, when the
explanation included the raw scores in addition to the
algorithmic action description, the levels of trust went
down. The author suggested that the introduction of
additional data was confusing, which undermined
the positive effect of the algorithm transparency.
Following Pieter ’s framework (2011) that differ-
entiates explanations of how algorithms work into
“why” versus “how,” Cotter, Cho, and Rader (2017)
examined the way Facebook provided explanations
about its news feed algorithm. They found that most
of the information targeted the question of “why”
this algorithm should be used, rather than “how” it
worked, and suggested that such explanation would
improve users’ confidence in the system, rather than
their trust in the system. However, the researchers
focused on the company’s behavior rather than users’
perceptions, and thus the impact of the explanation
on users’ trust is not certain. The importance of un-
derstanding “how” the algorithm works is also evi-
dent in studies that allowed users to slightly modify
the algorithm (Dietvorst, Simmons, & Massey, 2016).
The embeddedness of AI can also lead to questions
regarding who it is intended to benefit, and thereby
undermine trust. Alan et al. (2014) demonstrated that
transparency about the actual beneficiary of the de-
cision aid is another important consideration. In
a field experiment, participants were asked to test an
application that aimed to reduce their electricity
expenses. However, participants questioned the true
recipients of the benefits of AI: Was it them or the
electric company (Alan et al., 2014)? These issues are
less likely to surface in laboratory studies, as com-
mercial interests are less likely to be involved.
The complexity of AI algorithms rarely allows for
full transparency about the basis of its decisions and
the trade-offs it makes (Ananny & Crawford, 2018).
However, communication regarding embedded-AI
rationale and its actual abilities may significantly
improve the calibration of users ’ expectations re-
garding AI performance. Better calibration might
lower the initial, unrealistically high trust that was
observed in laboratory studies, while improving the
recovery of trust in the case of an erroneous outcome,
allowing users to build more effective long-term
collaboration with the technology (Hoff & Bashir,
2015).
Reliability
Research that tested the levels of trust driven by AI
accuracy and failure has revealed a stable pattern,
indicating that errors of an embedded-AI are detri-
mental to cognitive trust. For instance, Dzindolet
et al. (2003) tested an automated decision aid and
found that errors significantly decreased trust and
reliance on the aid. Separating between visibility of
an error and performance feedback across many tri-
als, researchers have demonstrated that the visibility
of an error effects trust in a way that is difficult to
repair. Similarly, Manzey et al. (2012) found that an
erroneous function had a stronger effect on trust than
a correct function, and that the trust recovery process
was very long. Consequently, researchers have con-
cluded that positive and negative feedback loops are
not symmetrical. Dietvorst et al. (2015) demon-
strated a similar effect of an erroneous function, re-
ferring to it as algorithm aversion . Across five
studies, researchers found that participants refused
to rely on a forecasting model after seeing it err. Par-
ticipants preferred to rely on a human forecast and not
on an algorithm, even when human errors were more
severe than algorithm errors.
Task Characteristics
Although AI is assumed to perform better on tasks
that involve mathematical skills, such as work
scheduling, this advantage is not always evident in
the empirical studies. For instance, Lee (2018) did not
find a significant difference in initial trust between AI
and human decision-making for analytical tasks.
However, for tasks that involve human skills, such as
work evaluation, participants demonstrated higher
2020 641Glikson and Woolley

--- PDF PAGE 16 ---
trust in human decisions than in algorithmic
decisions.
The subjective value of self-confidence also plays
an important role in trust, as people who perceive
themselves as more capable than a machine are less
trustful and tend to rely less on the technology
(Lewandowsky, Mundy, & Tan, 2000). Logg, Minson,
and Moore (2018) found that experts used AI-pro-
vided advice less than lay participants did, even
when ignoring it decreased experts ’ performance.
Researchers explained this finding by referring to
evidence of experts being less appreciative of others’
advice than nonexperts, suggesting that experts tend
to rely more on their own opinion.
Immediacy Behaviors
Most of the studies considering immediacy be-
haviors exhibited by robotic and virtual AI that were
reviewed indicated a positive impact on trust; how-
ever, it seems that such behaviors can highlight the
ability of embedded AI to constantly monitor
workers and lead to a decrease of trust. In a study of
Uber drivers, Mohlemann and Zalmanson (2017)
suggested that constant individual performance
evaluation and feedback, only possible through
constant tracking, violates drivers ’ sense of auton-
omy and decreases their trust. Such constant sur-
veillance is perceived as micro-management and
conveys a lack of trust from those deploying the AI,
which leads to low trust among the drivers.
Lee et al. (2015) suggested an additional explana-
tion of the drivers ’ decrease of trust. Following a set
of interviews, they concluded that a lack of person-
alization was a key factor that decreased trust. The
system lacked consideration of many specific cir-
cumstances, such as female drivers rejecting male
passengers late at night for safety reasons. Highly
intelligent systems should be able to engage in more
immediacy behaviors, such as personalization, which
can improve the sense of fairness and trust.
Additional support for the effect of personaliza-
tion could be found in three field studies conducted
by Matz, Kosinski, Nave, a nd Stillwell (2017). Re-
searchers tested the effects of psychological persuasion
on 3.5 million individuals using psychologically tai-
lored advertising and foundthat matching the content
of persuasive appe als to individuals ’ psychological
characteristics significantly altered participants ’ be-
havior as measured by clicks and purchases. Specifi-
cally, they found that persuasive appeals that were
matched to peoples ’ level of extraversion or open-
ness-to-experience resulted in up to 40 percent more
clicks and up to 50 percent more purchases than
their mismatching or nonpersonalized counterparts.
Embedded AI can also produce immediacy be-
haviors through an activation of nudges or boosts. A
nudge (e.g., a default option) is a change in the choice
architecture that shifts human behavior by taking
advantage of basic cognitive processes and biases
(e.g., inertia, procrastination, and loss aversion). By
contrast, a boost (e.g., better information) is a change
in the choice architecture that shifts behavior by clar-
ifying the direction an individual should move to
achieve personal objectives, which is often accom-
plished by enhancing an individual’s decision-making
competencies (Camilleri, Cam, & Hoffmann, 2007).
Analyzing the possible effects of nudges and boosts
generated by intelligent systems, Burr, Cristianini,
and Ladyman (2018) suggested that despite the overall
agreement that nudges should be used for benefiting
users, they might function as coercive and deceptive
tools that could redirect user behaviors toward un-
desirable outcomes. The deceptive nature of nudges
requires further research that reflects not only the effect
of nudges on trust but also the ethical aspects of the use
of nudges by AI.
BUILDING EMOTIONAL TRUST IN AI
Emotional trust is not commonly addressed in hu-
man relations with technology; however, emotions
are known to significantly affect human trusting be-
haviors (Hoff & Bashir, 2015). Furthermore, AI de-
velopers specifically target human emotions by
manipulating features of AI representations and
behaviors. Making a robot or a bot to look or act like
a human or a living thing is known to affect users ’
emotional reactions toward the technology. How-
ever, the effect is not always positive, and may also
result in negative emotions, such as a sense of
eeriness and fear. Even more surprisingly, some
researchers have found that people experienced
more positive emotions to ward an erroneous than
a correctly functioning robot (e.g., Mirnig, Stollnberger,
Miksch, Stadler, Giuliani, & Tscheligi, 2017). There-
fore, in addition to understanding users ’ cognitive
trust, there is a growing need to understand what and
how such features of the technology affect human
emotions and emotional trust.
To organize the review of the empirical research
on emotional trust in AI, we address the dimensions
which were studied the most in this regard, specifi-
cally the role of tangibility, anthropomorphism, and
immediacy behaviors (see Table 2 for an overview).
Although tangibility and immediacy behaviors were
642 JulyAcademy of Management Annals

--- PDF PAGE 17 ---
previously discussed with regard to their impact on
cognitive trust, anthropomorphism was rarely men-
tioned. Anthropomorphism, that is, human-likeness,
refers to the perception of technology or an object as
having human qualities, such as feelings. These per-
ceptions could be driven by interface features, such as
the human-like form of the robot; by behavioral fea-
tures, such as gaze and node; and by intentional
framing, such as giving a robot or bot a human name.
Emotional Trust in Robotic AI
Tangibility. Robots are known for evoking a vari-
ety of emotional reactions in human users, including
excitement, but also fear and a sense of eeriness. In
contrast to the overall positive effect of tangibility on
cognitive trust, its effect on emotional trust is mixed,
and might depend on the attitudes of the user. Al-
though some people tend to enjoy the physical pres-
ence of a robot, others find its tangibility threatening.
Focusing on the psychological mechanism that ex-
plains humans’ predisposition to trust robots, Nomura,
Suzuki, Kanda, and Kato (20 06), studying Japanese
students, developed a Negative Attitude toward Robots
Scale (NARS) that has been used in many HRI studies.
For instance, in a scenario- based study, Tussyadiah,
Zach, and Wang (2019) found a strong negative corre-
lation between NARS and tr usting beliefs regarding
functionality, helpfulness, and reliability of serving
robots. Bartneck et al. (2006) found that cultural back-
ground plays an important role in forming attitudes
toward robots, with U.S. participants having the most
positive perceptions.
The tangibility of a robot can be influenced by its
physical posture. Following Nomura et al. ’s (2006)
suggestion regarding negative predispositions to-
ward autonomous (i.e., AI-enabled) robots, Obaid,
Sandoval, Zlotowski, Moltchanova, Basedow, and
Bartneck (2016) examined the physical distance
between a human and human-like robot in a task
that required physical proximity. The researchers
found that people were more willing to approach
a sitting robot than a sta nding one. Users inter-
preted the posture as a signal of possible physical
risk that reduced trusting behavior. The emotional
subscale of the NARS was significantly correlated
with the kept distance, whereas users with prior
experience were more willing to approach the robot
(Obaid, Salem, Ziadee, Boukaram, Moltchanova, &
Sakr, 2016).
TABLE 2
Main Effects of Dimensions on Emotional Trust in AI, Organized by Representation
Dimensions Robotic AI Virtual AI Embedded AI
Tangibility Physical presence may not only
increase liking but also induce
fear.
Presence of a “persona” increases liking and
emotional trust.
Being unaware of AI use may
evoke anger. Positive
emotions could be driven by
good reputation of
a developing firm.
Selected
references
Obaid et al. (2016b), Shim & Arkin
(2014)
Chattaraman et al. (2014), de Visser et al. (2017),
Pak et al. (2012), Qiu & Benbasat (2009)
Eslami et al. (2015), Hengstler
et al. (2016)
Anthropomorphism Human-likeness mostly increases
positive emotions, but can also
cause discomfort.
Mostly increases trust, but also creates high
expectations regarding AI’s abilities.
Attractiveness and personalization, such as
ethnicity or facial similarity to the user,
increase trust.
Selected
references
Appel et al. (2016), Jacq et al.
(2016), Zhang et al. (2010),
Złotowski et al. (2016)
Khan & Sutcliffe (2014), Obaid et al. (2016a),
Verberne et al. (2015), Von Der P ¨utten et al.
(2010)
Immediacy
behaviors
Human-like behaviors induce
high emotional trust; erroneous
robots are liked more than
flawless ones.
Human-like behaviors increase trust and
liking, yet the effect depends on users ’
predispositions.
Selected
references
Bickmore et al. (2013), Birnbaum
et al. (2016), Jung et al. (2013),
Mirnig et al. (2017), Sandoval
et al. (2016)
Ben Mimoun et al. (2017), Dabholkar & Sheng
(2012), Kaptein et al. (2011), Matsui &
Yamada (2019)
2020 643Glikson and Woolley

--- PDF PAGE 18 ---
At the same time, there is also evidence of the
positive effect of robotic tangibility. For instance,
Shim and Arkin (2014) showed that elderly partici-
pants reported that feedback provided by a robot was
more enjoyable, motivating, and trustworthy than
one delivered by a computer screen. It seems that
when the initial predispositions toward robots are not
negative, such as in the case of U.S. users (Bartneck
et al., 2006), tangibility may increase emotional trust.
Thus, the preexisting attitudes of users could be an
important moderator of the effect of AI agent tangi-
bility on the development of emotional trust.
Anthropomorphism. Anthropomorphism, that is,
human-likeness, is generally thought to have a posi-
tive effect on human perceptions and emotions.
However, there is also evidence for its negative effect.
While examining anthropomorphic robots, some re-
searchers have built on the uncanny valley theory
(Mori, 1970), which argues that an encounter with
an artificial agent that possesses human-like features
leads to an experience of eeriness or a sense of un-
pleasantness that brings to mind thoughts of mortality
(Ho & MacDorman, 2010; Złotowski, Yogeeswaran, &
Bartneck, 2017). Research based on these theories
examines the negative effects of human-likeness on
users’ perceptions and emotional trust. Z łotowski,
Sumioka, Nishio, Glas, Bartneck, & Ishiguro (2016)
examined human interactions with machine-like and
human-like robots and found that the machine-like
robot was perceived as more empathetic and more
trustworthy than the human-like robot, regardless of
its positive or negative attitude (Złotowski et al., 2016).
Appel, Weber, Krause, and Mara (2016) compared
participants’ perceptions of a robot based on detailed
descriptions. They found that when a robot was
described as more human-like and having greater
agency, it was perceived as uncannier than a less in-
telligent robot. In the same vein, Złotowski et al. (2015,
2016) found that a human-like robot induced higher
levels of participant anxiety than a machine-like robot.
Interestingly, the studies that reported a negative
effect of anthropomorphism on human emotions and
emotional trust examined mostly the initial trust,
based on a short interaction or description. It seems
that increasing interaction experience with a tangi-
ble, human-like robot may decrease a sense of un-
pleasantness (Złotowski et al., 2015). It is also possible
that the mismatch between a robot ’s appearance and
its machine intelligence is a significant source for
negative impressions. Although it is assumed that
human-level machine intelligence (General AI) may
evoke emotional discomfort and fear, this type of
machine intelligence currently does not exist. In the
current state, low emotional trust could be evoked by
an anthropomorphic robot that lacks any intelligence,
as in the case of Z łotowski et al. ’s (2015) study of
a human-like robot.
Despite some of the research pointing to the neg-
ative effects associated with human-likeness, most
of the empirical research focuses on positive emo-
tions, such as excitement, curiosity, and liking,
which are the results of interactions with robots.
High levels of interest an d acceptance of robots
are evident across different populations, including
children and the elderly (Jacq, Lemaignan, Garcia,
Dillenbourg, & Paiva, 2016; Strohkorb, Fukuto,
Warren, Taylor, Berry, & Scassellati, 2016; Zhang
et al., 2010). For instance, Zhang et al. (2010) tested
different features of a service robot with elderly
participants and found th at more human-like fea-
tures of the robot were associated with more emo-
tional trust and the pleasantness of the interaction
experience. Furthermore, anthropomorphism had
a positive impact on users ’ physiological parame-
ters, such as heart rate. The positive power of an-
thropomorphism was also demonstrated by Waytz
et al. (2014), who anthropomorphized an autono-
mous vehicle by giving it a name and a voice. The
results indicated that an anthropomorphized car
was more trusted and less blamed for errors than
one that was simply mechanical.
Immediacy behaviors. In contrast to the human-
like appearance, human-like behaviors consistently
induce high emotional trust and liking in robotic AI.
Bickmore, Vardoulakis, and Schulman (2013) tested
the effectiveness of a robot museum guide and found
that its responsiveness had a significant effect on
visitors’ engagement, learning, enjoyment, and trust.
Birnbaum, Mizrahi, Hoffman, Reis, Finkel, and Sass
(2016) found that robot responsiveness increased
nonverbal approach behaviors such as leaning to-
ward the robot, eye contact and participants’ smiling,
and their willingness to be accompanied by the ro-
bot during stressful events. Jung, Lee, DePalma,
Adalgeirsson, Hinds, & Breazeal (2013) focused on
back-channeling (i.e., inte ractional cues of active
listening, which are mostly nonverbal, such as nod-
ding or moving toward) as an engagement strategy
of a robot. They found that this type of behavior
displayed by a robot lo wered participants ’ stress
and cognitive load.
An intriguing study examined how participants
react to an attempt by a robot to deceive in a re-
ciprocal game. The robot “bribed” participants by
intentionally letting them win (i.e., changing be-
havior to the benefit of the participant) in one task
644 JulyAcademy of Management Annals

--- PDF PAGE 19 ---
and afterward asked them to help in a task that would
benefit the robot. Researchers reported that the ro-
bots’ deceptive behavior had no effect on partici-
pants’ behavior, as almost all participants agreed to
help the robot regardless of its actions. Interestingly,
participants rated the cheating robot as more likable
than the honest one, perhaps attributing its behavior
to a prosocial intention (Sandoval, Brandstetter, &
Bartneck, 2016).
Users like not only a “dishonest” robot, but also an
erroneous robot, sometimes even more than they like
the one that does not make any mistakes. Mirnig et al.
(2017) intentionally designed a robot that makes
erroneous explanations and compared users ’ liking
and perceptions of anthropomorphism and intelli-
gence. They found that the erroneous robot was liked
more than a flawless one, and that other perceptions
were not affected (Mirnig et al., 2017). Similarly,
Ragni, Rudenko, Kuhnert, and Arras (2016) found that
people experienced more positive emotions toward
a robot that demonstrated less than perfect memory
skills in comparison to a flawless memorizing robot.
Although Ragni et al. (2016) suggested that higher
liking could be explained by a lowered sense of
competition with an erroneous robot, it is possible
that the uncanny valley theory also provides a valid
explanation, suggesting that a human-like, flawless
robot could induce higher levels of discomfort than
one that makes mistakes (Groom, Nass, Chen, Nielsen,
Scarborough, & Robles, 2009). Future research should
further explore the reasons for the positive emotional
reaction toward imperfect functioning anthropomor-
phic robots.
Just as with anthropomorphic behavior, high-im-
mediacy animal-like behaviors can also induce emo-
tional trust. Examining human reactions to a dog-like
robot, Lee, Park, and Song(2005) found that the robot’s
ability to improve its responsiveness had a significant
effect on the robot’s likability and humans’ trust and
increased the willingness to spend more time with it. It
seems that behaviors that reflect social intelligence,
such as social gestures, responsiveness, active listen-
ing, back-channeling, learning, and even cheating
( f o rt h eb e n e f i to ft h eu s e r ) ,h a v em o r ec o n s i s t e n ta n d
profound impact on emotional trust than the features
related to the robot ’s appearance. Furthermore, even
when the initial trust is low, experiencing an in-
teraction with a pro-social robot will increase trust.
Emotional Trust in Virtual AI
Tangibility. Research suggests that for virtual AI,
tangibility has mostly positive effects on emotional trust
(de Visser et al., 2016; Pak, Fink, Price, Bass, & Sturre,
2012; Qiu & Benbasat, 2009; Waytz et al., 2014).
Chattaraman et al. (2014) found that the presence of
a “persona” in a mock retail website significantly re-
duced the anxiety of older users, increasing perceived
social support. Similarly, Qiu and Benbasat (2009)
demonstrated that virtual embodiment of a recommen-
dation agent significantly improved users’ enjoyment
and trust, increasing perceptions of social presence.
It seems that tangibility of virtual agents may even
induce a physiological effect. de Visser et al. (2017)
found that oxytocin had an impact on human trust in
an anthropomorphic agent, leading participants to
trust a virtual agent more than an embedded AI (i.e.,
AI that has no tangible identity). The connection of
oxytocin to trust in the virtual agent suggests that
people tend to perceive such agents as social actors,
reacting similarly even on a physiological level.
Anthropomorphism. By contrast with tangibility,
anthropomorphism has more mixed effects on emo-
tional trust in virtual AI. Culley and Madhavan (2013)
suggested that anthropomorphic characters are often
depicted as capable of human qualities, including rea-
soning and motivation, which can induce very high ex-
pectations and initial trust.Because these expectations
are unrealistic, however, high expectations of anthro-
pomorphic characters are designed to fail. Ben Mimoun
et al. (2012) su ggested that poor calibration between
virtual agents’ appearance on commercial websites and
their actual performance drove customers ’ distrust
and abandonment, which in turn caused the website
owners to stop using the agents.
Anthropomorphic features provide the opportu-
nity to manipulate virtual AI appearance in different
ways, making it more attractive and thus increasing
its likability (Bartneck, Kuli ´c, Croft, & Zoghbi, 2009;
Beldad, de Jong, & Steehouder, 2010; Khan & Sutcliffe,
2014; Obaid et al., 2016a; Pak et al., 2012; Verberne,
Ham, & Midden, 2015). For instance, Khan and
Sutcliffe (2014) found that the visual representation
of virtual AI has a significant impact on human
compliance. By comparing agents presented through
two slightly different female images, the authors
found that the more visually attractive agent was
significantly more persuasive for both male and
female participants. Personalization of AI interface
features may also increase likability. Researchers
have suggested that to be effective in the global
market, a virtual agent sh ould conform to different
cultural preferences, including language, commu-
nication patterns, and facial characteristics such as
those that are associated with an ethnicity (Culley &
Madhavan, 2013). Some empirical studies support
2020 645Glikson and Woolley

--- PDF PAGE 20 ---
this notion, demonstrating that when the ethnic
facial features of a virtual agent match a cultural
group, it increases users ’ emotional trust (Obaid
et al., 2016a). Relatedly, while examining the per-
sonalization of an agent ’sv i s u a li m a g e ,V e r b e r n e
et al. (2015) found that when an agent was repre-
sented by a face whose features were adjusted based
on the face of the user, the users reported higher
levels of trust while using a driving simulation and
were more willing to allow the agent to choose the
route.
The issue of anthropomorphism of a virtual agent
leads to an additional question: To what extent does
it matter if the virtual agent represents AI or another
human? The interest in virtual platforms such as
Second Life has made possible the use of avatars for
representing humans in the virtual space in different
contexts, including business interactions. Empirical
research has followed this trend, testing the effect of
such representation on human reactions in general
and trust in particular. In a meta-analysis of 32 stud-
ies, Fox, (Grace) Ahn, Janssen, Yeykelis, Segovia, &
Bailenson, 2015 found that when avatars were pre-
sented to users as humans, they were more influ-
ential than when they were presented as AI-based.
Interestingly, the influence was more evident in
objective (behavioral) rather than subjective (self-
report) measures. It is important to note that the
framing of the avatar as human or as AI had a stronger
impact on participants ’ perceptions than the actual
level of intelligence or control over the character
(Von Der P ¨utten, Kr ¨amer, Gratch, & Kang, 2010).
Looking further into the differences between hu-
man avatars and intelligent agents activated by AI,
researchers have found that when talking to AI peo-
ple tend to engage less in impression management
and to disclose more sensitive personal information
than when talking to a human (Gratch, Lucas, King, &
Morency, 2014; Kr ¨amer et al., 2017; Lucas, Gratch,
King, & Morency, 2014). This tendency implies the
potential for higher emotional trust in AI than in
humans.
Immediacy behaviors. The interactive abilities
of virtual AI were mostly found to facilitate users ’
positive emotions, emotional trust, and satisfaction.
Kaptein, Markopoulos, de Ruyter, and Aarts (2011)
found that positive feedback about the ongoing con-
versation or social praise provided by an AI virtual
agent increased its perceived friendliness. Dabholkar
and Sheng (2012) demonstrated that an interac-
tional recommendation agent made users get more
involved in the process which led to higher satis-
faction and trust. Matsui and Yamada (2019) revealed
that a virtual agent that used hand gestures and ex-
pressive facial movements led to more positive
emotional contagion than a virtual agent that was
less expressive.
However, the effect of immediacy behaviors on
emotional trust might be moderated by users ’ char-
acteristics, such as need for social interaction. Ben
Mimoun, Poncin, and Garnier (2017) found that for
users with high need for interaction, the use of vi-
sually present, interactive virtual AI (compared with
a present but not interactive agent) had a positive
effect on perceived system social presence and play-
fulness; however, for users with low need for social
interaction, the use of virtual AI led to no effect on
social presence and playfulness. Personalization of
the immediacy behaviors to users’ needs and prefer-
ences could be an important factor for increasing the
positive effects of virtual AI.
An additional limitation to the effectiveness of
immediacy behaviors was found by Groom et al.
(2009) who showed that people experience more
positive emotions toward agents whose behavior
is not completely realistic. The researchers com-
pared a human-like virtual agent with a prerecorded
human voice recommendation that demonstrated
different variations of body- and lip-synchronized
movements. They found that the agent was most
liked when it engaged in only one of the synchro-
nized behaviors (either lips or body movement), but
not both. Researchers argued that these results are
consistent with the uncanny valley theory (Mori,
1970), suggesting that when the looks and behavior
of an artificial agent are too human-like, people ex-
perience discomfort and a sense of eeriness.
Emotional Trust in Embedded AI
Emotional trust in embedded AI can be built
based on the reputation of the technology and the
reputation of the organizations associated with it.
For instance, Hengstler et al. (2016), in an analysis
of eight case studies from the health and transporta-
tion industries, examined the way organizations aim
to establish users ’ trust in AI. Using semi-structured
interviews, the researchers concluded that firms pro-
mote trust in AI by connecting it to the reputation of
the developing organization and by making the tech-
nology more comprehensible, emphasizing its cur-
rent and future usability and benefits. However, this
study is limited to the perceived organizational in-
tentions, without presenting the effectiveness of
such tactics. Developers ’ reputation could be re-
lated to the perceived moral standards of the
646 JulyAcademy of Management Annals

--- PDF PAGE 21 ---
algorithm. Jago (2019) found that an algorithmic
decision was liked less than the same decision made
by a human because of its perceived lower authen-
ticity and ethicality. Future studies should further
examine the impact of moral perceptions and differ-
ent persuasion tactics for individual users as well as
for organizations that consider integrating AI into
their processes and production.
Because of the low visibility of embedded AI, its
impact on human emotions and emotion-related trust
is less clear, and as of this writing, there is very little
empirical research that addresses how tangibility,
anthropomorphism, or immediacy impacts emo-
tional trust in embedded AI. An example of an emo-
tional reaction to revealing the use of AI could be
found in the study on Facebook ’s news feed. Re-
searchers reported that users who were unaware of
algorithms being used felt surprise and anger (Eslami
et al., 2015). After learning the features of the algo-
rithm, the users became more active, gaining a higher
level of control. This means that experienced negative
emotions did not prevent the use of AI but lead to
a more conscious utilization.
It is possible that the initial high trust that is evi-
dent from laboratory studies and the initial low trust
that is evident from field studies (Alan et al., 2014;
Linkov et al., 2017) are results of emotional reactions
related to the perceived role of AI (i.e., assisting or
threatening). However, more empirical research is
needed to understand the antecedents of initial trust
and the interplay between cognitive and emotional
trust with regard to embedded AI.
GENERAL DISCUSSION
Building Cognitive Trust in AI —Discussion and
Future Research
Our review of the empirical research on cognitive
trust in AI demonstrates that AI representation and
the level of machine intelligence play an important
role in the nature of the trust people develop. Ex-
amining the different dynamics of cognitive trust,
our review reveals that for robotic AI, the trust tra-
jectory is similar to that characterizing trust devel-
opment in human relationships —it starts low and
increases following direct, hands-on experience.
However, for virtual and embedded AI, we see the
opposite; most commonly, high initial trust drops
a sar e s u l to fe x p e r i e n c e( s e eF i g u r e1 ) .T h el e v e lo f
machine intelligence may moderate the develop-
ment of trust, with a high level of intelligence leading
to higher trust following use and experience. For
robotic AI, a high level of machine intelligence gen-
erally leads to faster development of a high level of
trust that can be resilient, even in cases of low re-
liability. For virtual and embedded AI, high machine
intelligence offers the possibility of maintaining the
initial high levels of trust (by meeting the high ex-
pectations) or minimizing the reduction of trust.
It is important to note that although the described
trust trajectories capture the findings of most of the
studies to date, there are some studies that run con-
trary to these patterns. Although some laboratory
studies found high initial trust in robotic AI, some
other studies, mostly field-based, found low levels of
initial trust for virtual and embedded AI. A main
concern with low levels of initial trust is its impli-
cation for disuse (refusal to use) or abuse (playing
the algorithm) behaviors. Ironically, whereas disuse
prevents the hands-on experience that has the po-
tential to build trust, abuse of AI technology does
provide such an opportunity. This means that when
AI is highly intelligent, even abusive misuse may lead
to establishing trust (while producing unintended
behavior). Future research needs to take a long-term
perspective in examining the effect of AI respon-
siveness to different disuse and abuse behaviors on
developing trust and the human –AI working re-
lationship. In addition, there is a growing need for
research in real-life setti ngs, such as organizations
that are already using AI in their management or
decision-making systems. In laboratory studies, high
initial trust could be facilitated by the controlled
environment and the experimenter ’s involvement.
Therefore, despite the valuable knowledge that is
provided by laboratory studies, there is an urgent
need to conduct more field studies where using AI
is associated with greater personal risk for users.
Examining the overall effect of different functional
characteristics on establishing cognitive trust in
AI, we can conclude that for all AI representations,
the characteristics of the task the user and/or tech-
nology is performing play an important role; human
trust is higher for issues that do not require social
or emotional intelligence. This effect is consistent
with the general assumptions regarding the ad-
vances of technology over humans and humans
over technology (e.g., MABA-HABA). Although
perceptions of self-capab ilities and expertise may
moderate the beliefs regarding AI abilities to per-
form a specific task, future research should further
examine the way immediacy behaviors influence
these predispositions and judgments. The prosocial
interactional behaviors of AI may increase the per-
ceptions of its social intelligence and, thus, increase
2020 647Glikson and Woolley

--- PDF PAGE 22 ---
the range of tasks for which AI-enabled technology
c o u l db ep e r c e i v e da sa ne x p e r t .
Transparency, which was rarely studied with regard
to trust in robotic AI, was found to be highly important
for establishing cognitive trust in virtual and embed-
ded AI. Specifically, two types of transparency were
found to be effective: expl anations of how the algo-
rithm works and reflection of AI reliability. Although
understanding the ways in which AI makes decisions
could be impossible under certain circumstances,
the transparency of its level of ability and expected
reliability may play a large role in the process
of calibration between users ’ expectations and AI
performance. Such transparency may lower the
unrealistically high levels of initial trust that
sometimes form, which in turn may ease the actual
use, by preventing the rapid drop in trust (also ob-
served) and keeping the levels of trust stable during
longer term use. Future research should address
more thoroughly the issue of transparency, espe-
cially in cases where the technology is still in ear-
lier stages of development and could suffer from
inconsistent performance.
In the past, reliability was considered to be the most
important factor for adopting new technologies; how-
ever, the relationship between reliability and trust in AI
could be complex, as low reliability does not always
lead to low trust and disuse. On the one hand, the evi-
dence for the importance of reliability for trust could be
found in studies on embedded AI in which AI was
a decision-making aid that was disused as a result of
low reliability. However, it is important to note that in
these laboratory studies, AI was presented similarly to
less-complex technologies, had no agency or physical
representation, and was not engaged in any immediacy
behaviors, or exhibiting any other signs of high ma-
chine intelligence. On the other hand, for robotic AI,
high machine intelligence and immediacy behaviors
were found to moderate the effect of reliability on trust,
with immediacy behaviors increasing trust despite the
low reliability demonstrat ed by erroneous actions.
Furthermore, erroneous actions may even increase
emotional trust and liking (considered more in the fol-
lowing text), especially for robotic and virtual AI, rais-
ing important questions r egarding the potential for
manipulating human trust. Thus, future research
should further examine th e relationship between
AI reliability and trust across different AI repre-
sentations, considering machine intelligence as
a possible moderator, and examining additional
moderators, such as the consistency of perfor-
mance levels, expectations, and prior beliefs, and
perceived level of risk by the user.
The positive role of immediacy behaviors has
been examined most in research on robotic AI, as
these were perceived as indicators of high machine
intelligence. These behaviors appear to be sufficient
for establishing trust ( even in cases when robotic
AI acts erroneously); however, the psychological
mechanism that explains these relationships is not
clear. It is possible that people perceived the im-
mediacy behaviors as a sign of the AI agent ’s level of
intelligence, or as a recognition of their own value.
Similar to the notion famo usly expressed by Theo-
dore Roosevelt, “Nobody cares how much you
know, until they know how much you care, ” it ap-
pears that users are highly responsive to indications
that the technology “cares” about and is responding
to them. Future research should explore human
biases related to various aspects of immediacy be-
haviors, such as listening and personalization, not
only to understand its functionality for human trust
but also to prevent unethical use of such tactics.
Building Emotional Trust in AI —Discussion and
Future Research
This review provides several important insights
regarding the factors that influence emotional trust
across different AI representations. Focusing on ap-
pearance and behavioral factors, the existing litera-
ture examines emotional trust mostly with regard to
robotic and virtual AI, with very few studies on
emotional trust in embedded AI. However, there is
a growing need to examine the aspects that may in-
fluence emotional trust in embedded AI, especially
when users had no prior awareness of an AI presence
(Powers, 2017). Influential features could include
the form and timing that governs the AI presence and
explanation, or the relative role of AI developers ’
reputation. Even when emotional trust is not ex-
pected to be the main factor driving AI use, it could
significantly facilitate or moderate the effect of cog-
nitive factors. Therefore, future research should ex-
amine the direct and moderating roles of emotional
trust in embedded AI.
With respect to virtual and robotic representations,
it is interesting to note that the effect of tangibility on
emotional trust significantly varies. For virtual AI,
tangibility was found to have a mostly positive effect,
facilitating social presence, increasing liking, positive
feelings, and emotional trust. By contrast, for robotic
AI, its physical presence may also induce negative
emotions, such as fear. Future research should further
explore the importance of the negative feelings evoked
by AI tangibility, testing their possible implications for
648 JulyAcademy of Management Annals

--- PDF PAGE 23 ---
disuse or abuse, as well as for long-term relationships.
It is possible that while decreasing initial trust, the
impact of tangibility for developing trust over a longer
period is insignificant.
Interestingly, the effect of anthropomorphism also
differs across representations in terms of implications
for emotional trust. For virtual AI, anthropomorphism
was found to have a positive impact. For robotic AI, the
evidence is mixed, finding both positive and negative
effects of anthropomorphism on emotional trust. On
the one hand, people like anthropomorphic robots
more than mechanical-looking robots, but on the other
hand, anthropomorphic rob ots may evoke negative
feelings, discomfort, and a sense of eeriness. It seems
that at least part of this negative impact could be
explained by a mismatch between human-like ap-
pearance and low machine intelligence. However, it is
also possible that human-like appearance matched
with perfect performance will also lead to negative
emotional reactions, as suggested by the uncanny val-
ley theory. The greater likability of a mistake-making
robot compared with a highly reliable robot suggests
that high intelligence and perfect performance may
intimidate users, leading to feelings of discomfort and
distrust. A similar effect was found for virtual AI,
demonstrating that users pr efer the imperfect agent
that does not demonstrate a full match between voice
and movement. Future research must further examine
the boundaries for the positive and negative effects of
the match between anthropomorphic appearance and
interactive immediacy behaviors for emotional trust.
Cognitive versus Emotional Trust in AI
The reviewed research indicates that factors that
influence emotional trust differ from those influencing
cognitive trust, and some factors may even have dif-
ferent implications for cognitive and emotional trust.
Transparency and reliability, although having some
effect on cognitive trust in AI, remain relatively un-
explored with regard to emotional trust. Furthermore,
when studied, in some cases lower reliability was
found to have the opposite effect to what was ex-
pected, exhibiting a positive impact on emotional trust
in robotic AI.
The effect of tangibility mostly plays a positive role
for cognitive trust; however, it is not so for emotional
trust, as physical presence could be perceived as
threatening, and virtual presence may evoke un-
realistic expectations. High anthropomorphism was
found to generate perceptions of high machine in-
telligence; however, it was mostly studied in the
context of emotional trust and might also have
negative emotional implications, especially in the
case of a mismatch between representation and AI
capabilities. The impact of immediacy behaviors is
also different for cognitive and emotional trust. For
cognitive trust, immediacy behaviors were always
shown to have a positive effect, whereas for emotional
trust, some immediacy behaviors had the opposite
effect, making people uncomfortable, such as when
there was too close of a match between human-like
appearance and behaviors.
It seems that emotional and cognitive trust differ
even with regard to the impact of task characteris-
tics. With respect to receiving advice, users have
more cognitive trust in AI than in human advice on
technical issues, but not on issues requiring social
knowledge. However, when engaging in self-dis-
closure, users tend to be more honest and open with
AI than with other humans, disclosing more per-
sonal information and engaging less in impression
management behaviors.
Studies on emotional trust have more extensively
explored the impact of users’ predispositions toward
technology than have studies on cognitive trust.
Thus, with regard to emotional trust, we know that
the need for social interaction and NARS both have
important implications for trust development. By
contrast, studies on cognitive trust mentioned users ’
expectations for level of performance, especially for
virtual and embedded AI, yet rarely addressed its
source nor any other stable individual differences
that might affect user responses to AI technology.
Taken together, these discrepancies clearly indicate
the differences between cognitive and emotional trust
development in AI, leading to the question of their
relative impact on the actual use of AI. However, the
extant research findings on whether emotional trust
factors, such as likability, are more or less important
than cognitive trust factors are mixed. Matsui and
Yamada (2019) tested the impact of virtual agent
knowledge and social ge stures on participants ’
emotions, perceptions, and trust and found that an
increase in participants ’ positive affect facilitated
their trust even when the perception of agent in-
telligence was low (suggesting more relative impor-
tance for emotional over cognitive trust features). By
contrast, Wang et al. (2016) investigated cognitive
and emotional trust and found that perceived profes-
sionalism was important for establishing emotional
trust. Future studies shouldaddress the emotional and
cognitive aspects together, suggesting the conditions
under which there are synergies, or when emotional
factors will be more important than cognitive andvice
versa.
2020 649Glikson and Woolley

--- PDF PAGE 24 ---
Researchers seeking to understand emotional and
cognitive trust in AI may benefit from taking into
consideration human–human swift trust and the first
impression literature. This research suggests that our
impressions are driven by the perceptions of the
counterpart as having good intentions (warmth) and
the ability to pursue the intentions (competence;
Cuddy, Glick, & Beninger, 2011). Trust in AI is likely
to depend on both AI ’s likability and its perceived
intelligence. However, in contrast to human trustees,
for AI, the features influencing these perceptions
could be easily manipulated. Although for prior
generations of technology, the role of the interface
was mostly aimed at improving the ease of use, the
perceived warmth/likability of AI ’s representation
has tremendous potential to influence human emo-
tions (e.g., Kr¨amer et al., 2017; Looije et al., 2010). An
AI agent ’s attractiveness and its visual similarity to
a user (Khan & Sutcliffe, 2014; Verberne et al., 2015),
as well as the features of a human-like robot ’s face
(Zhang et al., 2010), may evoke unconscious emo-
tional reactions, similar to perceptions of warmth,
driving perceptions of AI’s benevolence and positive
intentions, and in this way could influence human
trust and behavior. These reactions, being largely
unrelated to the actual AI capabilities and intent,
could create impressions that are difficult to change
and require mindful ethical consideration and fur-
ther research.
The reviewed research also suggests some new
paths for further understanding trust among humans.
It could be useful to consider the different cognitive
and emotional implications of human physical pres-
ence, conceptualizing presence as a continuum rather
than as a category (i.e., colocated vs.d i s t r i b u t e d )
and further exploring the moderating factors in the
tangibility–trust relationship. The relative impact of
physical presence has already drawn some attention
from researchers studying group diversity and virtual
communication; however, addressing presence as a
continuum and focusing on moderating factors could
increase understanding of the nuances and un-
derlying psychological mechanisms that explain
tangibility –trust relations. In addition, the notion
of calibration between earl y expectations, shaping
initial trust, and actual capability and performance
could be useful for encouraging the development of
trust, especially for indi viduals and groups work-
ing at a geographical dista nce. Finally, as machine
intelligence increases and as we develop a better un-
derstanding of AI’s possible interference in human –
human relations, it would be possible to use AI for
facilitating positive initial trust among humans by
encouraging safe and mutually acceptable conversa-
tional content (Isbister et al., 2000) and increasing
mutual trust by facilitating more fair offers in negotia-
tions and decision-making (de Melo, Marsella, &
Gratch, 2016, 2017; Lee & Baykal, 2017).
Integrative Framework for Current and Future
Research on AI
As demonstrated in this review, empirical research
on trust in AI is distributed across different fields
and AI is represented to users in different forms. The
various types of representation could be considered
as the material presence associated with AI, whereas
the tangibility by itself has a dramatic effect on AI
trust and acceptance (e.g., de Visser et al., 2016).
Following the reviewed empirical studies and based
on the theoretical developments discussed (Lee et al.,
2006a), we propose an AI embodiment framework
that can help guide the integration of multidisci-
plinary knowledge on human –AI relations and fa-
cilitate future research. Although we used this
framework in a categorical manner while reviewing
the literature, we suggest that because it reflects the
material representation of AI, it could be seen as
a continuum that starts with a complete physical
presence (robotic representation), gradually di-
minishes to a virtual presence such as a 2D agent,
image, voice or text, and ends with an absence of any
distinguished AI presence (embedded representa-
tion). Addressing AI representations as a continuum
allows researchers to examine cases in which the
representation does not clearly belong to just one of the
categories, for example, cases in which an AI agent has
both physical and virtual representation, or when the
identification of AI is clear to some people but not to
others. These marginal cases are important as they can
assist in better understanding the way representation
and tangibility influence trust and human behavior.
Our framework also suggests that the level of ma-
chine intelligence plays an important moderating role
for human trust. In addition to enabling immediacy
behaviors, such as responsiveness, high machine in-
telligence is required for complex functions and higher
control over tasks. It may moderate the way trust is
being established and the importance of different di-
mensions for establishing trust (such as reliability).
As reflected by the reviewed research, the level
and type of embodiment, combined with the level of
machine intelligence encompassed in the technol-
ogy, have significant implications for the users ’
perceptions and feelings that lead to the type and
level of trust that users develop. We propose that
650 JulyAcademy of Management Annals

--- PDF PAGE 25 ---
this framework could be useful to researchers for
further understanding not only trust but also addi-
tional factors such as cooperation and reliance in
human–AI relations.
Additional Directions for Future Research
Multidisciplinary research on AI has developed
dramatically during the last 20 years, moving from
a strict focus on technological objectives toward an
interest in the human users’ perspective. Although in
the past, AI researchers considered human cognition
and behavior only for the purposes of developing
mathematical models that would allow AI to mimic
human logic, the relative maturity of technologies
has led to a shift toward a human-centered approach
(Jaimes, Gatica-Perez, Sebe, & Huang, 2007) that
considers the needs, perceptions, and behaviors of a
human user in the design. This approach was driven
partially by potential users ’ difficulty in trusting AI
technology and by the willingness of AI developers
to address these issues to increase collaboration with
AI (Gross, 2010; Sierhuis, Bradshaw, Acquisti, Van
Hoof, Jeffers, & Uszok, 2003). AI-enabled technology
presents an unprecedented opportunity for tech-
nology to develop a responsive, adaptive, supportive
“relationship” with human users that could not only
yield a wealth of benefits but also be a source of sig-
nificant threat.
The human-centered approach creates a great
opportunity for collaboration among researchers
interested in the evolution and integration of new
technologies from different disciplinary perspectives.
Although most of the current research on human –AI
dynamics is being conducted by cognitive engineering
and information systems researchers, organizational
research may contribute an important perspective that
would allow consideration of microlevel and mac-
rolevel factors as well as the short- and long-term
processes affected by the introduction of AI into orga-
nizations. For example, How does the implementation
of AI-guided hiring and evaluation change the re-
lationships of workers with their jobs? With their co-
workers? With their supervisors? How does it shape
the distribution of power in the organization?
Despite the fact that the field of organizational
behavior and management usually focuses on well-
established phenomena rather than on unfolding
events, the opportunity to make a significant im-
pact on the way AI is currently developed suggests
that we use the aggregated knowledge to provide
theoretical models relevant to the future of organi-
zations. Reviewing the existing empirical research,
we aimed to provide organization and management
researchers some needed perspective to join the
emerging multidisciplina ry discussion that may
determine the way organizations will integrate and
use AI in the future.
An additional contribution that could be made by
fostering interdisciplina ry collaboration on these
topics is an improvement in research methodology,
including proper study design with human sub-
jects and advanced statis tical analyses. Most im-
portantly, there is an urgent need for addressing
the great variance in measures used to assess human
trust in AI. Although many researchers invested in
developing new scales and behavioral measures for
trust (Bartneck et al., 2009; Charalambous, Fletcher, &
Webb, 2016; Headleand, Jackson, Williams, Priday,
Teahan, & Ap Cenydd, 2016; Ho & MacDorman, 2010;
Miller et al., 2016; Ullman & Malle, 2018; Walker,
Verwey, & Martens, 2018), the lack of open dialogue
across different disciplines regarding the issue of
measurement might discourage researchers from col-
laborating and limit research implications to a specific
discipline.
This review focused on the trust of an individual
user in AI, which has been the major focus of the
existing literature in this area. However, as some
researchers have noted (e.g., Yagoda & Gillan, 2012),
the development of trust in AI is often not only
limited to an individual user but also involves re-
lationships with other humans and machines being
directly or indirectly influenced by AI. Examining
AI as part of a complex system, such as a team or
a network, would allow researchers to address the
way people establish true relationships with AI within
organizations, as well as the way AI may change the
relationship between humans, and between humans
and other machines. Furthermore, as AI behavior is
not deterministic, scholars need to examine the
way it changes based on human –AI interactions
(Rahwan et al., 2019), incorporating knowledge on
the evolving relationships. Future research should
take into consideration a mu ltilayer perspective of
trust in AI that could more accurately explain hu-
man behavior.
It is important to note that, so far, many of the
analyses examining the future of AI integration in
organizations take the technological perspective,
focusing on the current maturity of specific tech-
nology that is rapidly improving and changing. From
this perspective, the smarter the AI, the smarter the
organization can be. A human-centered approach
needs to consider AI-integration from the employees’
perspective, taking into consideration elements that
2020 651Glikson and Woolley

--- PDF PAGE 26 ---
facilitate human trust, and the meaningfulness and
importance of a specific task to the employees. Past
research demonstrates that the adjustment of em-
ployees to new technologies is a key factor in trans-
lating technological advances into business revenue
(Davenport & Short, 1990). AI is unlikely to be dif-
ferent. Therefore, when making decisions regarding
the tasks to be outsourced to AI, managers should
consider not only the available technological capa-
bilities but also the human participants, their in-
terests, and incentives, and the ways to gain their
trust and improve their productivity via collabora-
tion with AI.
An additional aspect that should be considered
by organizational researchers relates to the skills
and characteristics required by future organizational
leaders, who will manage not only human employees
but also complex systems of different algorithms
collaborating among themselves and with humans.
Guiding the new generation of leaders who must be
technologically educated, there is a strong need to
make sure that skills to manage human employees
will keep playing an important role in business pro-
grams. Keeping the“human in the loop” is an essential
part of AI integration; therefore, future leaders should
be able to manage machine–machine, human–human,
and human–machine teams.
This review presents recent multidisciplinary em-
pirical research on cognitive and emotional trust in AI
in its various representations. By presenting the main
findings, providing a research framework, and high-
lighting the most promising future directions, we aim
to encourage researchers to explore the various as-
pects of human–AI interaction to facilitate a human-
centered, ethical and safe integration of AI within
organizations.
REFERENCES
Alan, A., Costanza, E., Fischer, J., Ramchurn, S. D.,
Rodden, T., & Jennings, N. R. 2014. A field study
of human-agent interaction for electricity tariff
switching. Proceedings of the13th International
Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent
Systems (AAMAS 2014): 965 –972. Paris, France.
Accessed November 13, 2018. Available at https://
dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/2615731.2617400.
Ananny, M., & Crawford, K. 2018. Seeing without know-
ing: Limitations of the transparency ideal and its ap-
plication to algorithmic accountability. New Media &
Society, 20(3): 973 –989.
Andrews, P. Y. 2012. System personality and persuasion in
human-computer dialogue. ACM Transactions on
Interactive Intelligent Systems , 2(2): 1–27.
Andrist, S., Bohus, D., Yu, Z., & Horvitz, E. 2016. Are you
messing with me? Querying about the sincerity of
interactions in the open world . ACM/IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Human-Robot Interaction,
2016-April(1): 409–410. Accessed May 27, 2019. Avail-
able at https://doi.org/10.1109/HRI.2016.7451780.
Appel, M., Weber, S., Krause, S., & Mara, M. 2016. On the
eeriness of service robots with emotional capabil-
ities. ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-
Robot Interaction, 2016-April: 411 –412. Accessed
October 16, 2019. Available at https://doi.org/10.1109/
HRI.2016.7451781.
Bainbridge, W. A., Hart, J. W., Kim, E. S., & Scassellati, B.
2011. The benefits of interactions with physically
present robots over video-displayed agents. Interna-
tional Journal of Social Robotics, 3(1): 41–52.
Baraglia, J., Cakmak, M., Nagai, Y., Rao, R., & Asada, M. 2016.
Initiative in robot assistance during collaborative
task execution. ACM/IEEE International Conference
on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI): 67 –74. Accessed
October 16, 2019. Available at https://doi.org/10.1109/
HRI.2016.7451735.
Bartneck, C., Kuli ´c ,D . ,C r o f t ,E . ,&Z o g h b i ,S .2 0 0 9 .M e a -
surement instruments for the anthropomorphism, ani-
macy, likeability, perceived intelligence, and perceived
safety of robots. International Journal of Social Ro-
botics,1 :7 1–81.
Bartneck, C., Suzuki, T., Kanda, T., & Nomura, T. 2006. The
influence of people ’s culture and prior experiences
with Aibo on their attitude towards robots. AI and
Society, 21(1-2): 217 –230.
Beldad, A., De Jong, M., & Steehouder, M. 2010. How shall
I trust the faceless and the intangible? A literature
review on the antecedents of online trust. Computers
in Human Behavior , 26(5): 857 –869.
Ben Mimoun, M. S., Poncin, I., & Garnier, M. 2012. Case
study—Embodied virtual agents: An analysis on rea-
sons for failure. Journal of Retailing and Consumer
Services, 19(6): 605 –612.
Ben Mimoun, M. S., Poncin, I., & Garnier, M. 2017. Animated
conversational agents and e-consumer productivity:
The roles of agents and individual characteristics. In-
formation and Management,5 4 ( 5 ) :5 4 5–559.
Bickmore, T., Pfeifer, L., & Schulman, D. 2011. Relational
agents improve engagement and learning in science
museum visitors . International Workshop on In-
telligent Virtual Agents (IVA 2011): 55 –67. Accessed
June 29, 2019. Available at https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-642-23974-8_7.
Bickmore, T. W., Vardoulakis, L. M. P., & Schulman, D. 2013.
Tinker: A relational agent museum guide.Autonomous
Agents and Multi-Agent Systems, 27(2): 254–276.
652 JulyAcademy of Management Annals

--- PDF PAGE 27 ---
Birnbaum, G. E., Mizrahi, M., Hoffman, G., Reis, H. T.,
Finkel, E. J., & Sass, O. 2016. Machines as a source of
consolation: Robot responsiveness increases human
approach behavior and desire for companionship .
ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-
Robot Interaction, 2016-April: 165 –171. Accessed
December 1, 2018. Available at https://doi.org/
10.1109/HRI.2016.7451748.
Bradshaw, J. M., Feltovich, P., & Johnson, M. 2011. Human-
agent interaction. In G. A. Boy (Ed.), Handbook of
human-machine interaction : 293 –302. Available at
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1201/9781315557380.
Brynjolfsson, E., & Mitchell, T. 2017. What can machine
learning do? Workforce implications.Science, 358(6370):
1530–1534.
Brynjolfsson, E., Mitchell, T., & Rock, D. 2018. What can
machines learn, and what does it mean for occupa-
tions and the economy?AEA Papers and Proceedings,
108: 43–47.
Burr, C., Cristianini, N., & Ladyman, J. 2018. An analysis of
the interaction between intelligent software agents
and human users. Minds and Machines, 28: 735–774.
Camilleri, A. R., Cam, M.-A., & Hoffmann, R. 2007. Nudges
and signposts —The effect of smart defaults and pic-
tographic risk information on retirement saving in-
vestment choices. Journal of Behavioral Decision
Making, 111(2): 154 –162.
Carlson, Z., Sweet, T., Rhizor, J., Poston, J., Lucas, H., &
Feil-seifer, D. 2015. Team-building activities for het-
erogeneous groups of humans and robots. In A. Tapus,
E. Andr ´e, J. Martin, F. Ferland, & M. Ammi (Eds.),
Social Robotics. ICSR 2015. Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science , vol. 9388: 113 –123. Cham, Switzer-
land: Springer.
Chao, C. Y., Chang, T. C., Wu, H. C., Lin, Y. S., & Chen, P. C.
2016. The interrelationship between intelligent agents’
characteristics and users’ intention in a search engine by
making beliefs and perc eived risks mediators. Com-
puters in Human Behavior, 64, 117–125.
Charalambous, G., Fletcher, S., & Webb, P. 2016. The de-
velopment of a scale to evaluate trust in industrial
human-robot collaboration. International Journal of
Social Robotics, 8(2): 193 –209.
Chattaraman, V., Kwon, W.-S., Gilbert, J. E., & Li, Y. 2014.
Virtual shopping agents. Journal of Research in In-
teractive Marketing, 8(2): 144 –162.
Chen, J. Y. C., & Barnes, M. J. 2014. Human –agent teaming
for multirobot control: A review of human factors is-
sues. IEEE Transactions on Human-Machine Sys-
tems, 44(1): 13 –28.
Cho, J. E., & Hu, H. 2009. The effect of service quality on
trust and commitment varying across generations.
International Journal of Consumer Studies , 33(4):
468
–476.
Christin, A. 2017. Algorithms in practice: Comparing web
journalism and criminal justice. Big Data & Society ,
4(2): 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1177/2053951717718855.
Cormier, D., Young, J., Nakane, M., Newman, G., & Durocher,
S. 2013. Would you do as a robot commands? An
obedience study for human-robot interaction .I n -
ternational Conference on Human-Agent Interaction,
I-3–1. Sapporo, Japan.
Cotter, K., Cho, J., & Rader, E. 2017. Explaining the news
feed algorithm. Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Confer-
ence Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Com-
puting Systems (CHI EA ’17): 1553 –1560. Accessed
January 3, 2019. Available at https://doi.org/10.1145/
3027063.3053114.
Crisp, C. B., & Jarvenpaa, S. L. 2013. Swift trust in global
virtual teams: Trusting beliefs and normative actions.
Journal of Personnel Psychology , 12(1): 45 –56.
Cuddy, A. J. C., Glick, P., & Beninger, A. 2011. The dy-
namics of warmth and competence judgments, and
their outcomes in organizations. Research in Orga-
nizational Behavior, 31: 73 –98.
Culley, K. E., & Madhavan, P. 2013. A note of caution re-
garding anthropomorphism in HCI agents.Computers
in Human Behavior , 29(3): 577 –579.
Dabholkar, P. A., & Sheng, X. 2012. Consumer participa-
tion in using online recommendation agents: Effects
on satisfaction, trust, and purchase intentions. The
Service Industries Journal , 32(9): 1433 –1449.
Danaher, J. 2017. Will life be worth living in a world
without work? Technological unemployment and the
meaning of life. Science and Engineering Ethics ,
23(1): 41–64.
Danks, D., & London, A. J. 2017. Algorithmic bias in au-
tonomous systems. International Joint Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, (January), Melbourne, Australia:
4691–4697. Available at https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-
2796.2007.01905.x.
Davenport, T., H., & Short, J., E. 1990. The new indus-
trial engineering: Information technology and busi-
ness process redesign. Sloan Management Review ,
31(4): 11–27.
Davis, F. D. 1989. Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of
use, and user acceptance of information technology.
MIS Quarterly, 13(3): 319–340.
Davis, G. F. 2019. How to communicate large-scale social
challenges: The problem of the disappearing American
corporation.Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America , 116(16):
7698–7702. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1805867115
de Melo, C. M., Marsella, S., & Gratch, J. 2016.“Do as I say,
not as I do: ” Challenges in delegating decisions to
2020 653Glikson and Woolley

--- PDF PAGE 28 ---
automated agents . International Conference on Au-
tonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS):
949–956. https://doi.org/https://dl.acm.org/doi/
10.5555/2936924.2937063
de Melo, C. M., Marsella, S., & Gratch, J. 2017. Increasing
fairness by delegating decisions to autonomous
agents. Conference on Autonomous Agents and
MultiAgent Systems, (AAMAS): 419 –425. Available
at https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/3091125.3091188.
de Visser, E., & Parasuraman, R. 2011. Adaptive aiding of
human-robot teaming: Eff ects of imperfect automa-
tion on performance, trust, and workload. Journal of
Cognitive Engineeri ng and Decision Making ,5 ( 2 ) :
209–231.
de Visser, E. J., Monfort, S. S., Goodyear, K., Lu, L., O’Hara,
M., Lee, M. R., Parasuraman, R., & Krueger, F. 2017. A
little anthropomorphism g oes a long way: Effects of
oxytocin on trust, compliance, and team perfor-
mance with automated agents. Human Factors, 59(1):
116–133.
de Visser, E. J., Monfort, S. S., McKendrick, R., Smith,
M. A. B., McKnight, P. E., Krueger, F., & Parasuraman,
R. 2016. Almost human: Anthropomorphism increases
trust resilience in cognitive agents. Journal of Experi-
mental Psychology: Applied, 22(3): 331–349.
de Winter, J. C. F., & Dodou, D. 2014. Why the Fitts list has
persisted throughout the history of function alloca-
tion. Cognition, Technology & Work , 16(1): 1 –11.
Demir, M., McNeese, N. J., & Cooke, N. J. 2017. Team
situation awareness within the context of human-
autonomy teaming. Cognitive Systems Research ,
46: 3 –12.
Demir, M., McNeese, N. J., Cooke, N. J., Ball, J. T., Myers, C.,
& Frieman, M. 2015. Synthetic teammate communi-
cation and coordination with humans.Proceedings of
the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual
Meeting, 59(1): 951 –955.
Desai, M., Kaniarasu, P., Medvedev, M., Steinfeld, A., &
Yanco, H. 2013. Impact of robot failures and feed-
back on real-time trust. ACM/IEEE International
Conference on Human-Robot Interaction: 251 –258.
Available at https://doi.org/10.1109/HRI.2013.6483596.
Desai, M., Medvedev, M., V ´azquez, M., McSheehy, S.,
Gadea-Omelchenko, S., Bruggeman, C., Bruggeman,
C., Steinfeld, A., & Yanco, H. 2012. Effects of chang-
ing reliability on trust of robot systems . Proceedings
of the Seventh Annual ACM/IEEE International
Conference on Human-Robot Interaction —HRI’ 12:
73–80. Available at https://doi.org/10.1145/2157689.
2157702.
Dietvorst, B. J., Simmons, J. P., & Massey, C. 2015. Algo-
rithm aversion: People erroneously avoid algorithms
after seeing them err.
Journal of Experimental Psy-
chology: General, 144(1): 114 –126.
Dietvorst, B. J., Simmons, J. P., & Massey, C. 2016. Over-
coming algorithm aversion: People will use imperfect
algorithms if they can (even slightly) modify them.
Management Science, 64: 1155–1170.
Duarte, J., Siegel, S., & Young, L. 2012. Trust and credit:
The role of appearance in peer-to-peer lending. Re-
view of Financial Studies , 25(8): 2455 –2484.
Dzindolet, M. T., Peterson, S. A., Pomranky, R. A., Pierce,
L. G., & Beck, H. P. 2003. The role of trust in automation
reliance. International Journal of Human-Computer
Studies, 58(6): 697–718.
Eslami, M., Rickman, A., Vaccaro, K., Aleyasen, A., Vuong,
A., Karahalios, K., Hamilton, K., & Sandvig, C. 2015. I
always assumed that I wasn ’t really that close to
[her]: Reasoning about invisible algorithms in news
feeds. Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Confer-
ence on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI
’15): 153–162. Accessed January 3, 2019. Available at
https://doi.org/10.1145/2702123.270255.
Fan, X., Oh, S., McNeese, M., Yen, J., Cuevas, H., Strater, L.,
& Endsley, M. R. 2008. The influence of agent re-
liability on trust in human-agent collaboration .
ECCE’ 08: Proceedings of the 15th European Con-
ference on Cognitive Ergonomics: The Ergonomics
of Cool Interaction, ACM International Conference
Proceeding Series, vol. 369: 1 –8. Accessed February
11, 2019. Available at htt ps://doi.org/10.1145/
1473018.1473028.
Faraj, S., Pachidi, S., & Sayegh, K. 2018. Working and or-
ganizing in the age of the learning algorithm. In-
formation and Organization , 28(1): 62 –70.
Fenster, M., Zuckerman, I., & Kraus, S. 2012. Guiding user
choice during discussion by silence, examples and
justifications. Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and
Applications, 242: 330 –335.
Ferr`as-Hern´andez, X. 2018. The future of management in
a world of electronic brains. Journal of Management
Inquiry, 27(2): 260 –263.
Fox, J., (Grace) Ahn, S. J., Janssen, J. H., Yeykelis, L.,
Segovia, K. Y., & Bailenson, J. N. 2015. Avatars versus
agents: A meta-analysis quantifying the effect of agency
on social influence, human-computer interaction.
Human-Computer Interaction , 30(5): 401 –432.
Frantz, R. 2003. Herbert Simon. Artificial intelligence as
a framework for understanding intuition. Journal of
Economic Psychology, 24(2): 265 –277.
Freedy, A., DeVisser, E., Weltman, G., & Coeyman, N. 2007.
Measurement of trust in human-robot collaboration.
2007 International Symposium on Collaborative
Technologies and Systems: 106 –114. Accessed on
October 14, 2019. Available at https://doi.org/
10.1109/CTS.2007.4621745.
654 JulyAcademy of Management Annals

--- PDF PAGE 29 ---
Gaudiello, I., Zibetti, E., Lefort, S., Chetouani, M., & Ivaldi,
S. 2016. Trust as indicator of robot functional and so-
cial acceptance. An experimental study on user con-
formation to iCub answers. Computers in Human
Behavior, 61: 633 –655.
Ghazizadeh, M., Lee, J. D., & Boyle, L. N. 2012. Extending
the technology acceptance model to assess automa-
tion. Cognition Technology and Work , 14(1): 39 –49.
Glass, A., McGuinness, D. L., & Wolverton, M. 2008.
Toward establishing trust in adaptive agents .
Proceedings of the 13th International Conference
on Intelligent User Interfaces —IUI’ 08: 227 –236.
Accessed on January 3, 2019. Available at https://
doi.org/10.1145/1378773.1378804.
Gombolay, M. C., Gutierrez, R. A., Clarke, S. G., Sturla,
G. F., & Shah, J. A. 2015. Decision-making authority,
team efficiency and human worker satisfaction in
mixed human –robot teams. Autonomous Robots ,
39(3): 293 –312.
Graetz, G., & Michaels, G. 2018. Robots at work. The Re-
view of Economics and Statistics , 100(5): 753 –768.
Gratch, J., Lucas, G., King, A., & Morency, L.-P. 2014. It’s
only a computer: The impact of human-agent in-
teraction in clinical interviews . Proceedings of the
2014 International Conference on Autonomous Agents
and Multi-Agent Systems, (AAMAS): 85–92.
Groom, V., Nass, C., Chen, T., Nielsen, A., Scarborough,
J. K., & Robles, E. 2009. Evaluating the effects of be-
havioral realism in embodied agents. International
Journal of Human Computer Studies, 67(10): 842–849.
Gross, T. 2010. Towards a new human-centred computing
methodology for cooperative ambient intelligence.
Journal of Ambient Intelligence and Humanized
Computing, 1(1): 31 –42.
Hancock, P. A., Billings, D. R., Schaefer, K. E., Chen, J. Y. C.,
De Visser, E. J., & Parasuraman, R. 2011. A meta-
analysis of factors affecting trust in human-robot in-
teraction. Human Factors, 53(5): 517 –527.
Haring, K. S., Silvera-Tawil, D., Watanabe, K., & Velonaki,
M. 2016. The influence of robot appearance and
interactive ability in HRI: A cross-cultural study .
Lecture Notes in Computer Science , 9979 LNAI,
392–401. New York: Springer Verlag. Available at
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-47437-3_38.
Headleand, C. J., Jackson, J., Williams, B., Priday, L., Teahan,
W. J., & Ap Cenydd, L. 2016. How the perceived identity
of a NPC companion influences player behavior. Lec-
ture Notes in Computer Science, 9590: 88–107.
Helldin, T., Falkman, G., Riveiro, M., & Davidsson, S. 2013.
Presenting system uncertainty in automotive UIs for
supporting trust calibration in autonomous driving .
Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on
Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular
Applications (AutomotiveUI, 13): 210–217. Eindhoven,
The Netherlands: ACM.
Hengstler, M., Enkel, E., & Duelli, S. 2016. Applied ar-
tificial intelligence and trust —The case of auton-
omous vehicles and medical assistance devices.
Technological Forecasting and Social Change,1 0 5 :
105–120.
Hinds, P. J., Roberts, T. L., & Jones, H. 2004. Whose job is it
anyway? A study of human-robot interaction in a col-
laborative task. Human-Computer Interaction , 19:
151–181.
Ho, C.-C., & MacDorman, K. F. 2010. Revisiting the un-
canny valley theory: Developing and validating an
alternative to the Godspeed indices. Computers in
Human Behavior, 26(6): 1508 –1518.
Hoff, K. A., & Bashir, M. 2015. Trust in automation: In-
tegrating empirical evidence on factors that influence
trust. Human Factors, 57(3): 407 –434.
Hoffman, G., & Breazeal, C. 2007. Effects of anticipatory
action on human-robot teamwork efficiency, flu-
ency, and perception of team . 2nd ACM/IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Human-Robot Interaction
(HRI): 1 –8. Available at https://doi.org/10.1145/
1228716.1228718.
Hollis, V., Pekurovsky, A., Wu, E., & Whittaker, S. 2018. On
being told how we feel: How algorithmic sensor feed-
back influences emotion perception.Proceedings of the
ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous
Technologies, 2(3): 1–31.
Huang, M. H., & Rust, R. T. 2018. Artificial intelligence in
service. Journal of Service Research, 21(2): 155–172.
Isbister, K., Nakanishi, H., Ishida, T., & Nass, C. 2000.
Helper agent. Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems —CHI’ 00,
(April 2000): 57–64. Available at https://doi.org/10.1145/
332040.332407.
Jacq, A., Lemaignan, S., Garcia, F., Dillenbourg, P., & Paiva,
A. 2016. Building successful long child-robot in-
teractions in a learning context . ACM/IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Human-Robot Interaction, April
2016: 239 –246. Available at https://doi.org/10.1109/
HRI.2016.7451758.
Jago, A. S. 2019. Algorithms and authenticity. Academy of
Management Discoveries, 5(1): 38 –56.
Jaimes, A., Gatica-Perez, D., Sebe, N., & Huang, T. S.
2007. Guest editors ’ introduction: Human-centered
computing—Toward a human revolution. Computer,
40(5): 30–34.
Jiang, W., Fischer, J. E., Greenhalgh, C., Ramchurn, S. D.,
Wu, F., Jennings, N. R., & Rodden, T. 2014. Social
implications of agent-based planning support for
human teams . 2014 International Conference on
Collaboration Technologies and Systems, CTS 2014:
2020 655Glikson and Woolley

--- PDF PAGE 30 ---
310–317. Available at https://doi.org/10.1109/CTS.
2014.6867582.
Jones, G. R., & George, J. M. 1998. The experience and
evolution of trust: Implications for cooperation and
teamwork. The Academy of Management Review ,
23(3): 531–546.
Jung, M. F., Lee, J. J., DePalma, N., Adalgeirsson, S. O.,
Hinds, P. J., & Breazeal, C. 2013. Engaging robots:
Easing complex human-robot teamwork using back-
channeling. Proceedings of the 2013 conference on
Computer supported cooperative work —CSCW’ 13:
1555–1566. Available at https://doi.org/10.1145/2441776.
2441954.
Kaplan, J. 2015. Humans need not apply: A guide to
wealth and work in the age of artificial intelligence.
New Haven: Yale University Press.
Kaptein, M., Markopoulos, P., de Ruyter, B., & Aarts, E.
2011. Two acts of social intelligence: The effects of
mimicry and social praise on the evaluation of an ar-
tificial agent. AI and Society , 26(3): 261–273.
Kellogg, K., Valentine, M., & Christin, A. 2019. Algorithms
at work: The new contested terrain of control. Acad-
emy of Management Annals , 14: 366 –410.
Khan, R. F., & Sutcliffe, A. 2014. Attractive agents are more
persuasive. International Journal of Human-Com-
puter Interaction, 30(2): 142 –150.
Kizilcec, R. F. 2016. How much information? Effects of
transparency on trust in an algorithmic interface .
Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems: 2390 –2395. Available
at https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858402.
Komiak, S. Y. X., & Benbasat, I. 2006. The effects of per-
sonalization and familiarity on trust and adoption of
recommendation agents. Management Information
Systems Quarterly, 30(4): 941–960.
Kopp, S., Gesellensetter, L., Kr¨amer, N. C., & Wachsmuth, I.
2005. A conversational agent as museum guide—De-
sign and evaluation of a real-world application. Lec-
ture Notes in Computer Science: 329–343. Available at
https://doi.org/10.1007/11550617_28.
Kr¨amer, N. C., Lucas, G., Schmitt, L., & Gratch, J. 2017.
Social snacking with a virtual agent —On the interre-
lation of need to belong and effects of social re-
sponsiveness when interacting with artificial entities.
International Journal of Human Computer Studies ,
109: 112–121.
Lee, M. K. 2018. Understanding perception of algorithmic
decisions: Fairness, trust, and emotion in response to
algorithmic management. Big Data & Society , 5(1):
205395171875668.
Lee, M. K., & Baykal, S. 2017. Algorithmic mediation in
group decisions: fairness perceptions of algorith-
mically mediated vs. discussion-based social
division. Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on
Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social
Computing – CSCW’ 17: 1035 –1048. Available at
https://doi.org/10.1145/2998181.2998230.
Lee, K. M., Jung, Y., Kim, J., & Kim, S. R. 2006. Are physi-
cally embodied social agents better than disembodied
social agents?: The effects of physical embodiment,
tactile interaction, and people’s loneliness in human–
robot interaction. International Journal of Human-
Computer Studies, 64(10): 962–973.
Lee, M. K., Kusbit, D., Metsky, E., & Dabbish, L. 2015.
Working with machines: The impact of algorithmic
and data-driven management on human workers .
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems – CHI’ 15:
1603–1612. Available at https://doi.org/10.1145/
2702123.2702548.
Lee, K. M., Park, N., & Song, H. 2005. Can a robot be per-
ceived as a developing creature? Human Communi-
cation Research , 31(4): 538 –563. https://doi.org/
10.1111/j.1468-2958.2005.tb00882.x.
Lee, K. M., Peng, W., Jin, S. A., & Yan, C. 2006. Can robots
manifest personality?: An empirical test of personality
recognition, social responses, and social presence in
human-robot interaction. Journal of Communication,
56(4): 754–772.
Lee, J. D., & See, K. A. 2004. Trust in automation: Designing
for appropriate reliance.Human Factors: The Journal
of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, 46(1):
50–80.
Leonardi, P. M. 2009. Why do people reject new technol-
ogies and stymie organizational changes of which they
are in favor? Exploring misalignments between social
interactions and materiality. Human Communication
Research, 35(3): 407–441.
Lewandowsky, S., Mundy, M., & Tan, G. P. A. 2000. The
dynamics of trust: Comparing humans to automation.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied , 6(2):
104–123.
Li, J. 2015. The benefit of being physically present: A survey
of experimental works comparing copresent robots,
telepresent robots and virtual agents. International
Journal of Human-Computer Studies,7 7 :2 3–37.
Linkov, F., Sanei-Moghaddam, A., Edwards, R. P., Lounder,
P. J., Ismail, N., Goughnour, S. L., Kang, C., Mansuria,
S. M., & Comerci, J. T. 2017. Implementation of hyster-
ectomy pathway: Impact on complications. Women’s
Health Issues, 27(4): 493–498.
Loebbecke, C., & Picot, A. 2015. Reflections on societal
and business model transformation arising from
digitization and big data analytics: A research agenda.
Journal of Strategic Information Systems , 24(3):
149–157.
656 JulyAcademy of Management Annals

--- PDF PAGE 31 ---
Logg, J. M., Minson, J. A., & Moore, D. A. 2018. Algorithm
appreciation: People prefer algorithmic to human
judgment (No. 17–086). Retrieved from https://www.
hbs.edu/faculty/Publication Files/17-086_610956b6-
7d91-4337-90cc-5bb5245316a8.pdf.
Looije, R., Neerincx, M. A., & Cnossen, F. 2010. Persuasive
robotic assistant for health self-management of older
adults: Design and evaluation of social behaviors. In-
ternational Journal of Human-Computer Studies ,
68(6): 386–397.
Lucas, G. M., Gratch, J., King, A., & Morency, L. P. 2014. It’s
only a computer: Virtual humans increase willing-
ness to disclose. Computers in Human Behavior , 37:
94–100.
Madhavan, P., & Wiegmann, D. A. 2007. Similarities and
differences between human –human and human –
automation trust: An integrative review. Theoreti-
cal Issues in Ergonomics Science , 8(4): 277 –301.
Malle, B. F., Scheutz, M., Forlizzi, J., & Voiklis, J. 2016.
Which robot am I thinking about? The impact
of action and appearance on people ’s evalua-
tions of a moral robot . ACM/IEEE International
Conference on Human-Robot Interaction, 2016-April:
125–132. Available at https://doi.org/10.1109/HRI.
2016.7451743.
Manzey, D., Reichenbach, J., & Onnasch, L. 2012. Human
performance consequences of automated decision aids:
The impact of degree of automation and system expe-
rience.Journal of Cognitive Engineering and Decision
Making,6 ( 1 ) :5 7–87.
Martelaro, N., Jung, M., & Hinds, P. 2015. Using robots to
moderate team conflict . Proceedings of the Tenth
Annual ACM/IEEE International Conference on Hu-
man-Robot Interaction Extended Abstracts —HRI’15
Extended Abstracts: 271 –271. Available at https://
doi.org/10.1145/2701973.2702094.
Matsui, T., & Yamada, S. 2019. Designing trustworthy
product recommendation virtual agents operating pos-
itive emotion and having copious amount of knowl-
edge. Frontiers in Psychology, 10: 675.
Matz, S. C., Kosinski, M., Nave, G., & Stillwell, D. J. 2017.
Psychological targeting as an effective approach to
digital mass persuasion. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of Amer-
ica, 114(48): 12714 –12719.
Mayer, R. C., Davis, J. H., & Schoorman, D. F. 1995. An
integrative model of organizational trust. The Acad-
emy of Management Review , 20(3): 709 –734.
McAllister, D. J. 1995. Affect- and cognition-based trust as
foundations for interpersonal cooperation in organiza-
tions.Academy of Management Journal, 38(1): 24–59.
McCarthy, J., & Feigenbaum, E. A. 1990. In memoriam:
Arthur Samuel: Pioneer in machine learning. AI
Magazine , 11(3): 10.
Mehrabian, A. 1967. Attitudes inferred from non-imme-
diacy of verbal communications. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior , 6(2): 294 –295.
Miller, D., Johns, M., Mok, B., Gowda, N., Sirkin, D., Lee, K.,
& Ju, W. 2016. Behavioral measurement of trust in
automation. Proceedings of the Human Factors
and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting , 60(1):
1849–1853.
Mirnig, N., Stollnberger, G., Miksch, M., Stadler, S., Giuliani,
M., & Tscheligi, M. 2017. To err is robot: How humans
assess and act toward an erroneous social robot. Fron-
tiers Robotics AI,4 :2 1 .
M ¨ohlmann, M., & Zalmanson, L. 2017. Hands on the
wheel: Navigating algorithmic management and
uber drivers ’ autonomy. Proceedings of the Thirty
Eighth International Conference on Information Sys-
tems (ICIS 2017), (December): 1 –17. Seoul, South
Korea.
Moran, S., Pantidi, N., Bachour, K., Fischer, J. E., Flintham,
M., Rodden, T., Evans, S., & Johnson, S. 2013. Team
reactions to voiced agent instructions in a pervasive
game. Proceedings of the 2013 International Confer-
ence on Intelligent User Interfaces—IUI’ 13. Available
at https://doi.org/10.1145/2449396.2449445.
Mori, M. 1970. Bukimi no tani [The uncanny valley]. En-
ergy, 7(4): 33 –35.
Mumm, J., & Mutlu, B. 2011. Designing motivational agents:
The role of praise, social comparison, and embodiment
in computer feedback.Computers in Human Behavior,
27(5): 1643–1650.
Murray, A., Rhymer, J., & Sirmon, D. 2019. Humans and
agentic technologies: Toward a theory of conjoined
agency in organizational routines. In ACM (Ed.), Col-
lective Intelligence. Pittsburgh, PA
Murray, A., Rhymer, J., & Sirmon, D.G. 2020. Humans and
technology: Forms of conjoined agency in organiza-
tions. Academy of Management Review . https://
doi.org/10.5465/amr.2019.0186.
Ng, K.-Y., & Chua, R. Y. J. 2006. Do I contribute more when I
trust more? Differential effects of cognition- and affect-
based trust. Management and Organization Review,
2(1): 43–66.
N o m u r a ,T . ,S u z u k i ,T . ,K a n d a ,T . ,&K a t o ,K .2 0 0 6 .M e a -
surement of negative attitudes toward robots. Interac-
tion Studies, 7(3): 437–454.
Obaid, M., Salem, M., Ziadee, M., Boukaram, H., Moltchanova,
E., & Sakr, M. 2016a. Investigating effects of pro-
fessional status and ethnicity in Human-Agent
interaction . HAI 2016 —Proceedings of the 4th In-
ternational Conference on Human Agent Interaction:
2020 657Glikson and Woolley

--- PDF PAGE 32 ---
179–186. Available at https://doi.org/10.1145/2974804.
2974813.
Obaid, M., Sandoval, E. B., Zlotowski, J., Moltchanova, E.,
Basedow, C. A., & Bartneck, C. 2016b.S t o p !T h a ti sc l o s e
enough. How body postures influence human-robot
proximity . 2016 25th IEEE International Symposium
on Robot and Human Interactive Communication
(RO-MAN): 354 –361. Available at https://doi.org/
10.1109/ROMAN.2016.7745155.
Oistad, B. C., Sembroski, C. E., Gates, K. A., Krupp, M. M.,
Fraune, M. R., & ˇSabanovi´c, S. 2016. Colleague or
tool? Interactivity increases positive perceptions
of and willingness to interact with a robotic co-
worker . International Conference on Social Robotics:
774–785. Available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
319-47437-3_76.
Pak, R., Fink, N., Price, M., Bass, B., & Sturre, L. 2012.
Decision support aids with anthropomorphic charac-
teristics influence trust and performance in younger
and older adults. Ergonomics, 55(9): 1059 –1072.
Panella, M., Marchisio, S., & Di Stanislao, F. 2003. Re-
ducing clinical variations with clinical pathways: Do
pathways work? International Journal for Quality in
Health Care, 15(6): 509 –521.
Parasuraman, R., & Manzey, D. H. 2010. Complacency and
bias in human use of automation: An attentional in-
tegration. Human Factors: The Journal of the Human
Factors and Ergonomics Society , 52(3): 381–410.
Parasuraman, R., & Riley, V. 1997. Humans and automa-
tion: Use, misuse, disuse, abuse. Human Factors: The
Journal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics So-
ciety, 39(2): 230 –253.
Pavlou, P. A. 2003. Consumer acceptance of electronic
commerce: Integrating trust and risk with the tech-
nology acceptance model. International Journal of
Electronic Commerce, 7(3): 101 –134.
Pfeffer, J. 2018. The role of the general manager in the
new economy: Can we save people from technology
dysfunctions? (April 19, 2018) . Stanford University
Graduate School of Business Research Paper No. 3714.
Available at http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3247251.
Pieters, W. 2011. Explanation and trust: What to tell the
user in security and AI? Ethics and Information
Technology, 13(1): 53 –64.
Powers, E. 2017. My news feed is filtered? Digital Jour-
nalism, 5(10): 1315 –1335.
Qiu, L., & Benbasat, I. 2009. Evaluating anthropomorphic
product recommendation agents: A social relationship
perspective to designing information systems. Journal
of Management Information Systems, 25(4): 145–182.
Ragni, M., Rudenko, A., Kuhnert, B., & Arras, K. O. 2016.
Errare humanum est: Erroneous robots in human-
robot interaction. 25th IEEE International Symposium
on Robot and Human Interactive Communication,
RO-MAN 2016: 501
–506. Available at https://doi.org/
10.1109/ROMAN.2016.7745164.
Rahwan, I., Cebrian, M., Obradovich, N., Bongard, J.,
Bonnefon, J. F., Breazeal, C., Crandall, J. W., Christakis,
N. A., Couzin, I. D., Jackson, M. O., Jennings, N. R.,
Kamar, E., Kloumann, I. M., Larochelle, H., Lazer, D.,
M c E l r e a t h ,R . ,M i s l o v e ,A . ,P a r k e s ,D .C . ,P e n t l a n d ,A .S . ,
Roberts, M. E., & Wellman, M. 2019. Machine behaviour.
Nature, 568(7753): 477–486.
Raj, M., & Seamans, R. 2019. Primer on artificial in-
telligence and robotics. Journal of Organization De-
sign, 8(1): 11.
Ramchurn, S. D., Wu, F., Jiang, W., Fischer, J. E., Reece, S.,
Roberts, S., Rodden, T., Greenhalgh, C., & Jennings,
N. R. 2016. Human –agent collaboration for disaster
response. Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Sys-
tems, 30(1): 82–111.
Robinette, P., Howard, A. M., & Wagner, A. R. 2015.Timing
is key for robot trust repair . Seventh International
Conference on Social Robotics: 574 –583. Available at
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-25554-5_57.
Robinette, P., Howard, A. M., & Wagner, A. R. 2017. Effect
of robot performance on human-robot trust in time-
critical situations. IEEE Transactions on Human-
Machine Systems, 47(4): 425–436.
Robinette, P., Li, W., Allen, R., Howard, A. M., & Wagner,
A. R. 2016. Overtrust of robots in emergency evac-
uation scenarios . ACM/IEEE International Confer-
ence on Human-Robot Interaction, 2016-April: 101–108.
Available at https://doi.org/10.1109/HRI.2016.7451740.
Rossi, A., Holthaus, P., Dautenhahn, K., Koay, K. L., &
Walters, M. L. 2018. Getting to know pepper: Effects
of people ’s awareness of a robot ’s capabilities on
their trust in the robot. HAI 2018—Proceedings of the
6th International Conference on Human-Agent Inter-
action: 246–252. Available at https://doi.org/10.1145/
3284432.3284464.
Rousseau, D. M., Sitkin, S. B., Burt, R. S., & Camerer, C.
1998. Not so different after all: A cross-discipline view
of trust. Academy of Management Review , 23(3):
393–404.
Russell, S. J., & Norvig, P. 1995. Artificial intelligence
a modern approach . Retrieved from http://citeseerx.
ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi510.1.1.259.8854&
rep5rep1&type5pdf.
Salem, M., Lakatos, G., Amirabdollahian, F., & Dautenhahn,
K. 2015. Would you trust a (faulty) robot?Proceedings
of the Tenth Annual ACM/IEEE International Confer-
ence on Human-Robot Interaction—HRI’ 15: 141–148.
Available at https://doi.org/10.1145/2696454.2696497.
658 JulyAcademy of Management Annals

--- PDF PAGE 33 ---
Samuel, A. L. 1959. Some studies in machine learning
using the game of checkers. IBM Journal of Research
and Development, 3(3), 210 –229.
Sanders, T. L., Wixon, T., Schafer, K. E., Chen, J. Y. C., &
Hancock, P. A. 2014. The influence of modality and
transparency on trust in human-robot interaction .
2014 IEEE International Inter-Disciplinary Conference
on Cognitive Methods in Situation Awareness and
Decision Support (CogSIMA): 156 –159. Available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/CogSIMA.2014.6816556.
Sandoval, E. B., Brandstetter, J., & Bartneck, C. 2016. Can
a robot bribe a human? The measurement of the
negative side of reciprocity in human robot interac-
tion. ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-
Robot Interaction, April 2016: 117 –124. Available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/HRI.2016.7451742.
Schoorman, F. D., Mayer, R. C., & Davis, J. H. 2007. An inte-
grative model of organizational trust: Past, present and fu-
ture.Academy of Management Review, 32(2): 344–354.
Schwab, K. 2017. The fourth industrial revolution . Re-
trieved from https://b ooks.google.com/books?hl5en&
lr5&id5GVekDQAAQBAJ&oi5fnd&pg5PR7&dq5The1
fourth1industrial1revolution&ots5NhKeFDzwhG&sig5
SxKMGj8OWFndH_0YSdJMKbknCwA#v5onepage&q5
The fourth industrial revolution&f5false.
Shim, J., & Arkin, R. C. 2014. Other-oriented robot de-
ception: a computational approach for deceptive
action generation to benefit the mark . IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics
(ROBIO 2014): 528 –535. Available at https://doi.org/
10.1109/ROBIO.2014.7090385.
Shinozawa, K., Naya, F., Yamato, J., & Kogure, K. 2005.
Differences in effect of robot and screen agent recom-
mendations on human decision-making.International
Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 62(2): 267–279.
Sierhuis, M., Bradshaw, J. M., Acquisti, A., Van Hoof, R.,
Jeffers, R., & Uszok, A. 2003. Human—Agent team-
work and adjustable autonomy in practice . Pro-
ceedings of the Seventh International Symposium on
Artificial Intelligence, Robotics and Automation in
Space (i-SAIRAS).
Strohkorb, S., Fukuto, E., Warren, N., Taylor, C., Berry, B., &
Scassellati, B. 2016. Improving human-human col-
laboration between children with a social robot
. 25th
IEEE International Symposium on Robot and Human
Interactive Communication, RO-MAN 2016: 551–556.
Available at https://doi.org/10.1109/ROMAN.2016.
7745172.
Strohkorb Sebo, S., Traeger, M., Jung, M., & Scassellati, B.
2018. The Ripple effects of vulnerability: The effects
of a robot ’s vulnerable behavior on trust in human-
robot teams . ACM/IEEE International Conference
on Human-Robot Interaction: 178 –186. Available at
https://doi.org/10.1145/3171221.3171275.
Stubbs, K., Wettergreen, D., & Hinds, P. J. 2007. Autonomy
and common ground in human-robot interaction: A
field study. IEEE Intelligent Systems , 22(2): 42 –50.
Tussyadiah, I. P., Zach, F. J., & Wang, J. 2019. Do travelers
trust intelligent service robots? Annals of Tourism
Research, 81: 102886.
Ullman, D., & Malle, B. F. 2017. Human-robot trust: Just
a button press away . Proceedings of the Companion
of the 2017 ACM/IEEE International Conference on
Human-Robot Interaction – HRI’ 17, (March 6 –9),
309–310. Available at https://doi.org/10.1145/3029798.
3038423.
Ullman, D., & Malle, B. F. 2018. What does it mean to trust
a robot? Steps toward a multidimensional measure
of trust . HRI 18 Companion: 263 –264. Available at
https://doi.org/10.1145/3173386.3176991.
Verberne, F. M. F., Ham, J., & Midden, C. J. H. 2015.
Trusting a virtual driver that looks, acts, and thinks
like you. Human Factors, 57(5): 895–909.
Von Der P ¨utten, A. M., Kr ¨amer, N. C., Gratch, J., & Kang,
S. H. 2010. “It doesn’t matter what you are! ” Explain-
ing social effects of agents and avatars. Computers in
Human Behavior, 26(6): 1641 –1650.
Walker, F., Verwey, W., & Martens, M. 2018. Gaze be-
haviour as a measure of trust in automated vehicles.
Proceedings of the 6th Humanist Conference.
Accessed on February 27, 2019. Retrieved from
http://www.humanist-vce.eu/fileadmin/contributeurs/
humanist/TheHague2018/29-walker.pdf.
Wang, W., & Benbasat, I. 2007. Recommendation agents for
electronic commerce: Effects of explanation facilities
on trusting beliefs. Journal of Management Infor-
mation Systems, 23(4): 217–246.
Wang, W., Qiu, L., Kim, D., & Benbasat, I. 2016. Effects of
rational and social appeals of online recommendation
agents on cognition- and affect-based trust. Decision
Support Systems, 86: 48 –60.
Waytz, A., Heafner, J., & Epley, N. 2014. The mind in the
machine: Anthropomorphism increases trust in an
autonomous vehicle. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 52: 113 –
117.
Wirtz, J., Patterson, P. G., Kunz, W. H., Gruber, T., Lu, V. N.,
Paluch, S., & Martins, A. 2018. Brave new world:
Service robots in the frontline. Journal of Service
Management, 29(5): 907–931.
Xiao, B., & Benbasat, I. 2007. E-commerce product rec-
ommendation agents: Use, characteristics, and im-
pact. MIS Quarterly, 31(1): 137–209.
Yagoda, R. E., & Gillan, D. J. 2012. You want me to trust
a ROBOT? The development of a human –robot in-
teraction trust scale. International Journal of Social
Robotics, 4(3): 235 –248.
2020 659Glikson and Woolley

--- PDF PAGE 34 ---
You, S., & Robert, L. 2019. Subgroup formation in human-
robot teams. ICIS 2019 Proceedings. Accessed on Feb-
ruary 18, 2020. Retrieved from https://aisel.aisnet.org/
icis2019/general_topics/general_topics/18.
Zhang, T., Kaber, D. B., Zhu, B., Swangnetr, M., Mosaly, P.,
& Hodge, L. 2010. Service robot feature design effects
on user perceptions and emotional responses. In-
telligent Service Robotics , 3(2): 73 –88.
Złotowski, J. A., Sumioka, H., Nishio, S., Glas, D. F.,
Bartneck, C., & Ishiguro, H. 2015. Persistence of the
uncanny valley: The influence of repeated in-
teractions and a robot ’s attitude on its perception.
Frontiers in Psychology, 6: 883: 1–13. https://doi.org/
10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00883.
Złotowski, J., Sumioka, H., Nishio, S., Glas, D. F., Bartneck,
C., & Ishiguro, H. 2016. Appearance of a robot affects
the impact of its behaviour on perceived trustworthi-
ness and empathy. Paladyn, Journal of Behavioral
Robotics, 7(1): 55 –66.
Złotowski, J., Yogeeswaran, K., & Bartneck, C. 2017. Can we
control it? Autonomous robots threaten human identity,
uniqueness, safety, and resources.International Journal
of Human-Computer Studies, 100: 48–54. https://doi.org/
10.1016/J.IJHCS.2016.12.008.
Anita Williams Woolley is an Associate Professor of Or-
ganizational Behavior and Theory at the Tepper School of
Business, Carnegie Mellon University. She received her
doctorate in organizational behavior at Harvard Univer-
sity. Her research focuses on team collaboration and col-
lective intelligence, and the ways it can be enhanced by
artificial intelligence.
Ella Glikson is an Assistant Professor of Organizational
Behavior at the Graduate School of Business Admin-
istration, Bar Ilan University. She received her doc-
torate at Technion – Israeli Institute of Technology. Her
research focuses on multicultural virtual teams, com-
puter-mediated communication and the role of tech-
nology, and especially artificial intelligence in human
interactions.
660 JulyAcademy of Management Annals