--- PDF PAGE 1 ---
Vol.:(0123456789)
Ethics and Information Technology (2024) 26:41 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10676-024-09777-3
ORIGINAL PAPER
A phenomenology and epistemology of large language models: 
transparency, trust, and trustworthiness
Richard Heersmink1 · Barend de Rooij1 · María Jimena Clavel Vázquez1 · Matteo Colombo1
Accepted: 16 May 2024 / Published online: 18 June 2024 
© The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
This paper analyses the phenomenology and epistemology of chatbots such as ChatGPT and Bard. The computational 
architecture underpinning these chatbots are large language models (LLMs), which are generative artificial intelligence 
(AI) systems trained on a massive dataset of text extracted from the Web. We conceptualise these LLMs as multifunctional 
computational cognitive artifacts, used for various cognitive tasks such as translating, summarizing, answering questions, 
information-seeking, and much more. Phenomenologically, LLMs can be experienced as a “quasi-other”; when that hap -
pens, users anthropomorphise them. For most users, current LLMs are black boxes, i.e., for the most part, they lack data 
transparency and algorithmic transparency. They can, however, be phenomenologically and informationally transparent, in 
which case there is an interactional flow. Anthropomorphising and interactional flow can, in some users, create an attitude of 
(unwarranted) trust towards the output LLMs generate. We conclude this paper by drawing on the epistemology of trust and 
testimony to examine the epistemic implications of these dimensions. Whilst LLMs generally generate accurate responses, we 
observe two epistemic pitfalls. Ideally, users should be able to match the level of trust that they place in LLMs to the degree 
that LLMs are trustworthy. However, both their data and algorithmic opacity and their phenomenological and informational 
transparency can make it difficult for users to calibrate their trust correctly. The effects of these limitations are twofold: 
users may adopt unwarranted attitudes of trust towards the outputs of LLMs (which is particularly problematic when LLMs 
hallucinate), and the trustworthiness of LLMs may be undermined.
Keywords ChatGPT · Bard · Large language models · Transparency · Cognitive artifacts · Generative AI · Conversational 
AI · Algorithms · Knowledge · Trust · Big data
Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) are the underlying computa-
tional architecture of chatbots such as ChatGPT and Bard. 1 
These are currently changing how we interact with informa-
tion and computers, perform cognitive tasks, and form our 
beliefs about the world. They are having a significant (dis-
ruptive) impact on individuals and society, particularly on 
knowledge workers and the knowledge economy (Dwivedi 
et al., 2023). People working in various industries such as 
education, research, administration, communication, content 
creation, translation, computer programming, customer ser-
vice, human resources, and other industries, for better or 
worse, all use LLMs for their work-related tasks.
ChatGPT (Generative Pre-Trained Transformer) is pow-
ered by GPT-3.5, which is an LLM developed by OpenAI. It 
 * Richard Heersmink 
 j.r.heersmink@tilburguniversity.edu
1 Department of Philosophy, School of Humanities and Digital 
Sciences, Tilburg University, Tilburg, The Netherlands
1 At the time of writing this essay, Google’s LLM chatbot was called 
Bard, now it’s called Gemini.

--- PDF PAGE 2 ---
 R. Heersmink et al.
41 Page 2 of 15
was launched on 30 November 2022 and is freely available. 
Notably, it has seen the fastest growth of users for any com-
puter application in human history, currently having over a 
100 million active users (Hu, 2023).2 Bard runs on Google’s 
language model for dialogue applications (LaMDA). It was 
released on 21 March 2023 and at the time of writing this 
paper, it is only available as an experimental test version. 
Both ChatGPT and Bard are generative AIs, which means 
that they can generate new information, in their case natural 
language, mathematics, logic symbols, and computer code, 
based on a computational and probabilistic analysis of a 
massive dataset. The underlying computational system is 
a natural language processing (NLP) model, trained on a 
selected but extremely large dataset of text from the Web, 
including articles, books, Wikipedia entries, websites, and 
forums. The multifunctionality of current LLMs is impres-
sive. They can write essays, poems, summaries, speeches, 
news articles, and computer code. They can recommend 
hotels, books, music, films, and many other things. They 
can perform calculations, solve differential equations, sug-
gest routes, translate text as well as edit and proofread text. 
Whilst LLMs can be used for a variety of cognitive tasks, 
the focus in this paper is on their epistemic functions, i.e., 
their role in belief-formation processes. 3
In this paper, we intend to answer the following question: 
How can we conceptualise and evaluate the epistemic rela-
tion between LLMs and their human users? In answering 
this question, we take the following approach. Drawing on 
research in 4E cognition and philosophy of technology, we 
first conceptualize LLMs as multifunctional computational 
cognitive artifacts (Sect.  ‘‘Large language models as com-
putational cognitive artifacts ’’). We then analyse some of 
the phenomenological dimensions of the relation between 
human users and LLMs, focussing on anthropomorphism 
(i.e., projecting human-like properties onto LLMs) as well 
as various types of transparency (i.e., reflective, phenom-
enological, and informational). We suggest that anthropo-
morphising and interactional flow can, in some users, create 
an attitude of (unwarranted) trust towards the output LLMs 
generate (Sect. ‘‘Phenomenology’’). We end this paper 
with examining these epistemic pitfalls in greater detail 
and recommending ways of mitigating these pitfalls (Sect.  
‘‘Epistemology’’).
Large language models as computational 
cognitive artifacts
In this section, we’ll conceptualise LLMs as multifunc-
tional computational cognitive artifacts (Cassinadri, 2024). 
Research in 4E cognition 4 (Clark, 2003 ; Donald, 1991 ; 
Hutchins, 1995; Norman, 1993) and philosophy of tech-
nology (Brey, 2005; Fasoli, 2018 ; Heersmink, 2016) has 
focused on better understanding the cognition-aiding prop-
erties and functions of artifacts. Such artifacts are material 
objects or structures that functionally contribute to perform-
ing a cognitive task such as, for example, remembering, 
calculating, navigating, reasoning, or information-seeking 
(Heersmink, 2013; Norman, 1991). In the twenty-first cen-
tury, typical examples of cognitive artifacts are navigation 
systems, online calendars, search engines, recommendation 
systems, and online encyclopedias. These artifacts and appli-
cations provide information that we use to form our beliefs 
and perform our cognitive tasks. We use these artifacts as 
the information they provide allows us to perform cognitive 
tasks faster, more efficiently, and more reliably than without 
using such artifacts. Sometimes, they allow us to perform 
cognitive tasks that we would otherwise not be able to per -
form at all (Kirsh & Maglio, 1994).
LLMs are machine learning algorithms based on neural 
networks. The algorithm is trained on a massive dataset of 
text collected from the Web, which is typically unlabelled 
and uncategorized. It uses a self-supervised or semi-super -
vised learning methodology. During the training process, 
the algorithm learns the statistical relationships between 
words, phrases, and sentences. More precisely, the algorithm 
is given a sequence of words and taught to predict the next 
word token-by-token. It assigns a weighting to each part of 
the input data (i.e., a sequence of words) based on its statis-
tical significance and changes the weightings based on the 2 OpenAI also has a more advanced (paid) version, ChatGPT Plus, 
which is based on GPT-4, an LLM with significantly more parame-
ters. In this paper, we focus on ChatGPT, not on ChatGPT Plus.
3 Given the prominent role information technology plays in our 
belief-formation processes, there is a growing body of literature on 
the social epistemology of information technology. This literature 
analyses and evaluates sources like, for example, Wikipedia (Bruck -
man 2022; Fallis 2008; Frost-Arnold 2018, 2023; Magnus 2009) and 
Google Search (Gunn & Lynch 2018; Lynch 2016; Miller & Record 
2013, 2017; Munton 2022; Narayanan & Cremer 2022; Simpson 
2012; Smart & Shadbolt 2018). It also conceptualises the nature of 
beliefs formed based on online sources (Grindrod 2019; Ridder 2022) 
and the epistemic virtues users should have when interacting with 
online sources (Gillet & Heersmink 2019; Heersmink 2018; Schwen-
gerer 2021; Smart & Clowes 2021).
4 4E cognition stands for embodied, embedded, extended, and enac-
tive approaches to the mind and cognition (see, e.g., Newen et  al. 
(2018)). These approaches are united by their revisionary and criti-
cal attitude towards some of the assumptions that are characteristic 
of the classical and connectionist paradigms in cognitive science and 
philosophy of mind, e.g., computationalism and representationalism. 
Theorists within the 4E paradigm have also offered arguments for the 
constitutive role (see, e.g., Clark & Chalmers (1998); Varela et  al. 
(1991) or for the causal impact (see, e.g., Rupert (2010)) of the non-
neural body and the environment in cognitive processes. The consid-
eration of the body and the environment, thus, becomes central to our 
explanations of cognitive phenomena. This has also led to a focus on 
the role played by technology and tools in cognition.

--- PDF PAGE 3 ---
A phenomenology and epistemology of large language models: transparency, trust, and…
Page 3 of 15 41
difference between its prediction and what the next word is. 
This process is then repeated until the model’s predictions 
are accurate enough. The datasets on which both GPT-3.5 
and LaMDA were trained are extremely large, so they were 
able to learn statistical patterns and relationships between 
words and phrases in natural language at an unprecedented 
scale. It’s not clear exactly on what data GPT-3.5 and 
LaMDA were trained (more on this below), but (at the time 
of writing this essay) the cut-off date for ChatGPT is Janu-
ary 2022, and it’s unclear what the cut-off date for LaMDA 
is. After training, language is entered into the chatbot, for 
example a question, and the output is what the algorithm 
predicts the next word will be. The algorithm is thus a sta-
tistical prediction engine of words in sentences. During this 
prediction process, it will generate a reasonable continua-
tion of whatever text it’s got so far (Wolfram, 2023 ). For 
both ChatGPT and Bard, users can give a “thumbs up” or 
“thumbs down” to evaluate the quality of the output.
Belief-forming processes often involve cognitive arti-
facts (Palermos, 2011). Grindrod (2019) refers to beliefs 
formed based on output from a machine learning algorithm 
as “computational beliefs”, a type of instrumental belief. 
Instrumental beliefs are those formed on the basis of deliver-
ances provided by an instrument (e.g., reading a thermom-
eter) (Grindrod, 2019; Sosa, 2006). The beliefs formed based 
on LLMs should, however, be distinguished from other sorts 
of instrumental beliefs. When using LLMs for information-
seeking purposes and to form computational beliefs, it is 
unlike using a search engine in that these chatbots don’t 
provide a ranked list of Webpages, but instead have a con-
versational nature in which users can ask questions, follow 
up questions, and challenge incorrect premises. 5 They can 
also generate a response that indicates that a mistake has 
been made (when pressed), as well as generate a response 
that indicates when a request is inappropriate or immoral.
ChatGPT can’t browse the Web in real-time but is trained 
on Web data until January 2022. Bard, by contrast, can also 
browse the Web in real-time by using Google Search. When 
a response to a question, prompt, or command is not avail-
able in the dataset, it browses the Web to find the infor -
mation and formulate a response. But in either case, when 
interacting with LLMs, one interacts with an algorithmically 
filtered version of information already existing on the Web. 
LLMs have therefore been described as “stochastic parrots” 
(Bender, Gebru, McMillan-Major & Shmitchell 2021; but 
compare Arkoudas, 2023), merely repeating and rephrasing 
what has already been written on the Web.
LLMs and generative AI are potentially the next land-
mark moment in the development of cognitive artifacts and 
computer systems. From a user’s perspective, two features 
are distinctive: (1) their strong computational agency and 
(2) multifunctionality. With LLMs, the division of com-
putational labour between the human user and a cognitive 
artifact is shifting outwards to the artifact. A significant 
amount of textual output can be generated with very little 
input from the user. In terms of computational agency, there 
is a shift from agency located primary in the human agent to 
agency being located primarily in the artifact. When writing 
a text on a word-processor, for example, the text is writ-
ten by the human agent. The word-processor facilitates and 
scaffolds the written text to be typed, edited, deleted, cop-
ied, and moved around in the document. Word-processers 
also include spelling and grammar checking functions and 
can autosuggest words. However, in case of LLMs such as 
ChatGPT or Bard, the entire text is now generated by an 
algorithm. A question, prompt, or command is given, and 
the entire text is then written, in some cases even an entire 
essay. This is a completely new functionality for a cognitive 
artifact and a new division of computational labour between 
humans and cognitive artifacts (Heersmink, 2024).
LLMs are thus strongly computationally autonomous, but 
they are also highly multifunctional. For example, below is 
a non-exhaustive list of computational tasks both ChatGPT 
and Bard can perform:
– Answer questions: they can provide information on a 
wide range of topics such as history, science, geopolitics, 
etc.
– Language translation: they can translate text from one 
language to another, supporting multiple languages.
– Text generation: they can generate new text based on a 
given prompt, such as writing a story, article, poem, or 
speech.
– Computer code generation: they can generate computer 
code in various programming languages, including 
Python, Java, and JavaScript, based on a given prompt.
– Text summarization: they can summarize long text or 
documents into a shorter version, keeping the most 
important information.
– Sentiment analysis: they can analyse text and determine 
the sentiment expressed, such as positive, negative, or 
neutral.
– Dialogue systems: they can participate in a conversation 
and respond to user prompts in a natural and coherent 
way.
5 A reviewer asked how the computational beliefs formed based on 
LLMs and search engines are qualitatively different. The compu-
tational beliefs can certainly differ in the informational content and 
epistemic quality. To give one example, in March 2023, one of the 
authors (RH) of the current paper asked the following question in 
Google Search and ChatGPT: “When was the Mona Lisa painted?” 
The featured snippet of Google Search answered “1503” and the 
answer ChatGPT gave was “1802”. The first answer is correct, 
the second answer is not. A comprehensive epistemic comparison 
between Google Search and LLMs is beyond the scope of our analy -
sis, it is, however, an important topic for future empirical research.

--- PDF PAGE 4 ---
 R. Heersmink et al.
41 Page 4 of 15
These functions of LLMs are both cognitive and epis-
temic. Cognitive, in that their function is to assist their users 
to perform all sorts of cognitive tasks such as summarizing, 
classifying, or translating text. Epistemic, in that their func-
tion is to provide information on a vast range of topics by 
answering questions or responding to epistemic prompts. 
Their cognitive and epistemic functions often blur into each 
other. What’s particularly noteworthy here are the many 
kinds of computational tasks they can perform. PCs, tablets, 
and smartphones are also computationally multifunctional 
(Fasoli, 2018), largely because their hardware allows them 
to run different kinds of software and applications. By con-
trast, LLMs are only one type of software application, being 
highly computationally multifunctional, which is distinctive.
Phenomenology
In this section, we’ll analyse two phenomenological dimen-
sions of the relation between human agents and LLMs, 
namely (1) the anthropomorphising of LLMs and (2) the 
various aspects of transparency (i.e., reflective, phenom-
enological, and informational). Before doing so, we want 
to point out that there are many kinds of users with various 
levels of knowledge and digital literacy skills. The knowl-
edge, skills, and attitudes users bring to the interface, shape 
the relationship users have to an LLM.
Chatbots as quasi‑others
What’s it like interacting with an LLM chatbot? Questions, 
prompts, or commands are typed into a text bar and the LLM 
will then generate a response. The responses that ChatGPT 
generates don’t appear at once but appear letter by letter, 
word by word, making it almost seem as if a person is writ-
ing the answers (though it writes much faster than a per -
son ever could). The responses Bard generates appear all at 
once on the screen, but usually take a few seconds to appear. 
Within specific chats or conversations, they can remember 
what was written before in the conversation and sometimes 
refer to previously generated information. In their responses, 
they use the first-person pronoun “I”. It’s apparent you’re not 
chatting with a human person; however, being able to ask 
follow-up questions, challenge incorrect information, and 
the generally high quality of the responses they generate, can 
give the impression that they (a) understand your questions, 
prompts, and commands, and (b) understand the information 
they generate.
Taking the experience of using an artifact as target of 
analysis, philosopher of technology and postphenomenolo-
gist Ihde (1990) has identified various kinds of relations 
between human agents and technological artifacts. One 
type of relation we have to technology is referred to as the 
“alterity relation”, in which we relate to an artifact as a 
“quasi-other”. Ihde writes that: “Technological otherness is 
a quasi-otherness, stronger than mere objectness but weaker 
than the otherness found within the animal kingdom or the 
human one” (1990, p. 100). When we develop an alterity 
relation with an artifact, we anthropomorphise it, i.e., we 
project human-like properties onto the artifact.6 The proper-
ties we project onto artifacts typically have to do with our 
mental and cognitive capacities, i.e., properties such as hav-
ing emotions, intentions, beliefs, desires, autonomy, intel-
ligence, memory, problem-solving abilities, reasoning, and 
even consciousness. The more human-like the artifact is, 
the more we are fascinated by it, and the more we tend to 
anthropomorphise it. 7 So, if the interface was designed not 
as a chatbot but as a human face (using generative AI tech-
nology) and with audio input and output (but still running 
on the same LLM), our fascination and anthropomorphism 
would likely increase significantly8 (Go & Sundar, 2019).
Having typed a question, prompt, or command, both 
ChatGPT and Bard take some time to generate an answer 
or response. During that time, it can feel as though the sys-
tem is “thinking”. When a human is asked a question and 
takes some time to respond, she is thinking and organising 
her thoughts. So, it’s understandable that some humans may 
project the same attitude towards the system when a conver-
sational AI is taking time to generate a response. Not only 
taking time to generate a response, but also the responses 
themselves give the impression you’re interacting with an 
intelligent system capable of reasoning and problem-solving. 
For the most part, LLMs really seem to understand your 
requests, even when they are not well-formulated. Blake 
Lemoine, computer scientist at Google involved with devel-
oping LaMDA, famously claimed that LaMDA is conscious 
and has a mind equivalent of a human child (Tiku, 2022). He 
was so impressed with some of the responses (in conversa-
tions about religion, emotions, and fears) that he claimed 
LaMDA is sentient and has human-like consciousness. Cur-
rent LLMs are not conscious and don’t have minds (Chal-
mers, 2023), but it is certainly remarkable that a software 
engineer involved in developing these models believes they 
are conscious and have a mind. At the very least, this shows 
that chatbots have come a long way in mimicking human 
6 On a postphenomenological view, technology plays a mediating 
role between a human agent and an experienced world (Ihde 1990; 
Verbeek 2015). LLMs can be said to algorithmically mediate between 
a human user and a large dataset.
7 This is why many of us are so fascinated by humanoid robots 
(Salles, Evers & Farisco 2020).
8 OpenAI recently announced that they are working on an auditory 
interface https:// openai. com/ blog/ chatg pt- can- now- see- hear- and- 
speak

--- PDF PAGE 5 ---
A phenomenology and epistemology of large language models: transparency, trust, and…
Page 5 of 15 41
linguistic behaviour since the invention of ELIZA by Joseph 
Weizenbaum (1966).9
Due to the conversational nature of the interaction, the 
typically high quality of the responses they generate, their 
sophisticated language and reasoning capabilities, and their 
use of the first-person pronoun “I”, it’s hard not to anthro-
pomorphise these chatbots to some extent. Shanahan (2024) 
also emphasises that the dialogical behavior exhibited by 
LLMs can generate in us the experience of being in the pres-
ence of a human-like interlocutor. The seductive, but mis -
leading, allure of artificial dialogical agents such as LLMs 
is compounded by the fact that it is natural and helpful to 
use categories such as “believes”, “knows”, “feels”, and 
“reasons” to describe the behavior of non-human agents, 
including AI systems. But, as the history of comparative 
psychology indicates, taken too seriously, such descriptions 
contribute to introducing various comparative biases in eval-
uating the nature and mechanisms of the behavior of agents 
that are very dissimilar from humans.10
Finally, as stated in the introduction to this section, 
there is a large variety in the knowledge, skills, and atti-
tudes different users bring to the interface. Some may not 
anthropomorphize LLMs at all, whereas others may go so 
far as to believe they have a conscious mind. The more we 
anthropomorphize LLMs, the more we tend to trust the 
responses they generate. Based on empirical research on 
chatbots, Adamopoulou & Moussiades argue that the devel-
opment of “trust is also supported by the level to which the 
chatbot is human-like” (2020, p. 1; see also Neff & Nagy, 
2016). Whether or not this is warranted epistemologically 
(more on this in Sect.  ‘‘Epistemology’’), humans might be 
more likely to trust the output of chatbots that appear more 
human-like.
Transparency
There are various notions of transparency helpful in ana-
lysing one dimension of the phenomenological relation-
ship between LLMs and their human users. We’ll use three 
notions of transparency: reflective, phenomenological, and 
informational transparency.
Reflective transparency
In their analysis of AI systems and drawing on Wheeler 
(2019, 2021), Andrada et al. (2023) distinguish between two 
types of transparency, namely “reflective transparency” and 
“phenomenological transparency”. When an AI system is 
reflectively transparent, we can see into the inner workings 
of the computational system, in which case we understand 
why it does what it does. 11 For the purpose of this paper, 
we identify two subtypes of reflective transparency, namely 
“data transparency” and “algorithmic transparency”. Data 
transparency can be characterised as knowing and having 
access to the data on which the algorithm was trained. Algo-
rithmic transparency can be characterised as understanding 
or explaining how the algorithm works in specific situations, 
i.e., why an algorithm generated a particular outcome or 
decision at a given time. How the algorithm works partly 
depends on the data on which it was trained, so algorithmic 
transparency partly depends on data transparency.
LLM chatbots are not reflectively transparent, neither in 
terms of data transparency, nor in terms of algorithmic trans-
parency.12 Consider data transparency first. We don’t know 
exactly on which data they have been trained. Neither Ope-
nAI, nor Google make this information explicitly available. 
When asked,13 “On which data are you trained?”, ChatGPT 
answers the following14:
9 Chatbots can also use emojis, which may contribute to anthropo-
morphising them. Véliz (2023) has argued that this should be pre-
vented.
10 We can distinguish between anthropomorphism and other com-
parative biases such as anthropocentrism and anthropofabulation. The 
former is the tendency of humans to unjustifiedly assume that only 
characteristically human behavior can be intelligent. This can lead us 
to be overly impressed by superficial, but misleading dis-similarities 
between humans and other agents so that we chalk up as unintelligent 
or uninteresting behaviors that do not fit distinctively human criteria. 
Anthropofabulation (Buckner, 2013), in turn, results from an unjusti-
fiedly inflated conception of human psychological competences and 
performance. This lead us to compare human and non-human perfor -
mance in unfairly disanalogous conditions or to unfairly presume that 
blunders and mistakes that also apply to humans are particularly seri-
ous in non-human agents.
11 This sort of transparency has received the most attention from 
philosophers working on the ethics of AI, as the reflective opacity 
of AI systems can cause moral issues, for example issues related to 
accountability and algorithmic bias.
12 To be fair, when interacting with other humans we don’t know pre-
cisely what goes on in their brains. Human cognitive processes under-
lying speech can be opaque too (Zerilli et al., 2019).
13 All the conversations with ChatGPT and Bard were done by the 
first author of the paper. The dates of these conversations are indi-
cated in footnotes.
14 4/8/2023.

--- PDF PAGE 6 ---
 R. Heersmink et al.
41 Page 6 of 15
We know that its dataset includes the Common Crawl, 
which is a publicly available corpus of Webpages, including 
billions of Webpages and is one of the largest text datasets 
available. This also includes Wikipedia entries.
When asking Bard,15 “On which data are you trained?”, 
Bard answers the following:
Importantly, we don’t know on which criteria Open AI 
and Google decide which information to include in the data-
set and which information not to include.
It is of course also possible to ask where the information 
from its answers came from. For instance, when asking, 16 
“Who was the first woman to win the Nobel prize?”, both 
give the correct answer (Marie Curie), but Bard also pro-
vides a reference to the Wikipedia article on “List of female 
Nobel laureates”, which is where it extracted the informa -
tion from, whereas ChatGPT doesn’t give references for this 
answer. Even when asked,17 “Where did you got that infor-
mation from?”, it answers:
15 4/8/2023.
16 9/8/2023. The knowledge questions below are standard science 
questions in trivia quizzes. 17 9/8/2023.

--- PDF PAGE 7 ---
A phenomenology and epistemology of large language models: transparency, trust, and…
Page 7 of 15 41
One way to test which information they were trained on is 
by asking to summarise a specific text, for example a book. 
When prompting18 to give a summary of Andy Clark’s Nat-
ural-Born Cyborgs, they both give a decent summary. When 
further prompting, 19 “Where did you get this information 
from?”, ChatGPT answers:
So, it’s not clear whether the summary is based exclu-
sively on the primary text or whether other information is 
also included.
The response Bard20 gives is as follows:
18 10/8/2023. We chose Natural-Born Cyborgs, as one of the authors 
(RH) is very familiar with it and in a good position to evaluate the 
summaries of ChatGPT and Bard.
19 10/8/2023.
20 10/8/2023.

--- PDF PAGE 8 ---
 R. Heersmink et al.
41 Page 8 of 15
So, in this case, it’s clear that the summary isn’t exclu-
sively based on the primary text, but also on other material. 
When further prompted21 by asking: “Which online articles 
and essays about the book?”, Bard answers: “As a language 
model, I’m not able to assist you with that.” This data opac-
ity for both ChatGPT and Bard is a serious epistemological 
issue, as users can’t track down and evaluate those sources. 
In relation to Wikipedia articles, Magnus (2009) argues that 
it’s important to be able to evaluate the authority of a source. 
One way to do this with Wikipedia entries is to track down 
the citation (if there is one), and to evaluate the authority of 
the author or publisher (in so far as this is possible). But with 
ChatGPT and Bard this is not possible, because there are no 
references or citations given.22
We know Wikipedia entries are part of the dataset for 
both ChatGPT and Bard. These entries are generally of rea-
sonably good epistemic quality (Fallis, 2008), but there are 
still some issues with Wikipedia entries regarding complete-
ness, accuracy, objectivity, proper citations, and other issues. 
There is thus an epistemic risk with using Wikipedia as part 
of the dataset. More importantly, we don’t know whether 
authoritative sources are prioritised during the training. For 
example, when asking, 23 “What is the hottest planet in the 
solar system?”, we don’t know whether scientific sources 
(e.g., a textbook in astronomy) are prioritised or whether 
sources in the Common Crawl or Wikipedia are prioritised. 
This is again a serious issue to do with data opacity. When 
using Wikipedia or Google Search to answer this question, 
sources can be traced down and evaluated. However, per -
haps over time the epistemic hygiene of the dataset will be 
improved, and most hallucinations corrected through user 
feedback. But until these issues are resolved, the strategies 
to overcome data opacity remain insufficient.24
A related epistemological issue is that ChatGPT and Bard 
fabricate or hallucinate references (Alkaissi & McFarlane, 
2023).25 For example, when prompting 26 to “Write a brief 
essay arguing for the extended mind thesis, including refer-
ences”, one of the references ChatGPT gave was:
– Hutchinson, B. (2018). Cognitive scaffolding and the 
extended mind. Philosophical Psychology, 31(4), 561–
578.
And one of the references Bard gave was: 
– Sutton, J., & Levy, P. (2012). The cognitive niche: How 
brains make minds. MIT Press.
The problem here is that neither of these publications 
exist. First, the titles don’t exist. Second, B. Hutchinsons 
has never published anything on the extended mind.27 J. Sut-
ton most likely is based on John Sutton who is a prominent 
extended mind theorist and P. Levy is most likely based 
on Neil Levy who has published two texts with “extended 
mind” in the title. However, they never published together, 
and certainly not a non-existing book. For an expert on this 
topic this is more or less obvious, but a novice might think 
these are references to actual literature, giving the false 
impression that the summary is based on actual literature.
Regarding algorithmic transparency, OpenAI publishes 
their research papers on their website in which some of the 
ideas and principles behind their technology are explained. 
But this is not understandable or transparent for most peo-
ple. Google has a FAQ about Bard, but that doesn’t explain 
how its algorithm works. However, one can find YouTube 
videos and popular science articles explaining the principles 
of LLMs (e.g., Wolfram, 2023). So, for people who are inter-
ested, it’s possible to learn how the algorithm of LLMs work 
on a general level. But understanding why the algorithm 
generates a response for specific queries and prompts is not 
transparent. For most users, the algorithmic transparency of 
both ChatGPT and Bard is lacking. They are, for the most 
part, computational black boxes.
Phenomenological transparency
Phenomenological transparency can be characterised as 
being able to see through an artifact. The classical phenom-
enologists of the twentieth century have characterised this 
type of transparency as a particular way of experiencing a 
tool. Heidegger (1962) wrote that, when an experienced 
carpenter uses a hammer, it largely withdraws from con-
scious attention. Rather than focussing on the agent-tool 
interface (i.e., how to hold the hammer), the focus is on 
21 10/8/2023.
22 Though Bard sometimes gives references when it is generating 
responses using Google Search instead of LaMDA, in which case one 
can check the references.
23 19/7/2023.
24 A reviewer suggested that many AI systems are plagued by issues 
of opacity. We agree with this suggestion, however, our point is that 
AI systems should be designed such that they are as transparent as 
possible (see also von Eschenbach 2021). This is certainly not the 
case with current LLMs, as they lack both data transparency and 
algorithmic transparency. We think more can and should be done to 
increase data and algorithmic transparency of LLMs.
25 Though this may not be unique to LLMs, students and academics 
also sometimes fabricate references.
26 10/8/2023. We chose this prompt as one of the authors (RH) is 
familiar with the extended mind literature and therefore in a good 
position to verify the references.
27 Though Edwin Hutchins is one of the founding figures of distrib-
uted cognition theory, which is the empirical cousin of the extended 
mind. It’s possible the algorithm predicted “Hutchinsons” based on 
“Hutchins”.

--- PDF PAGE 9 ---
A phenomenology and epistemology of large language models: transparency, trust, and…
Page 9 of 15 41
the tool-environment interface (i.e., how to hit the nail). 
Merleau-Ponty (1965 ) pointed out that a similar phenom -
enon occurs when a blind person is using a cane to sense 
and navigate the environment. The cane becomes transpar -
ent equipment with which the blind person encounters the 
world. In these examples, the tool becomes transparent-in-
use, because the agent is absorbed by the task (i.e., ham-
mering and navigating). The focus is on the task, not on the 
tool. When that happens, we’re typically in a state of flow 
and the tool is almost invisible in use (Clark, 2003, 2007). 
Depending on the tool, it can take a fair amount of experi-
ence and time to make it transparent-in-use. The first time 
a person uses a hammer, cane, or other tool, it is not fully 
transparent-in-use. In most cases, we need to train ourselves 
to become fluent in the use of these tools.
In relation to phenomenological transparency, Heidegger 
(1962) identifies three modes of interaction with objects. 
When an object is ready-to-hand it is transparent-in-use; 
when an object is present-at-hand, we consciously investi-
gate the object itself; and when a transparent object (tem-
porarily) breaks down, it becomes unready-at-hand. For 
example, when we’re using a computer mouse to interact 
with the interface, a user will typically experience the mouse 
as transparent-in-use (Bird, 2011; Dotov et al., 2010). The 
user will focus on the cursor on the screen, using it to click 
on icons, highlight texts, etc. But when the battery of the 
mouse runs flat, the user’s conscious attention will tempo-
rarily shift to the mouse itself. When the mouse temporarily 
breaks down, it becomes unready-at-hand. After replacing 
the battery, the mouse will quickly become transparent-in-
use again. Lastly, if we were to put the mouse in a museum 
exhibition on the history of computer technology, then it 
will become the focus of our attention and present-at-hand.
Norman (1998) has operationalised the phenomenologi-
cal notion of transparency to the design of computer sys-
tems, arguing that the more the system and interface with-
draw to the background, the better it is designed. As Norman 
puts it, “Design the tool to fit the task so well that the tool 
becomes a part of the task, feeling like a natural extension 
of the work, a natural extension of the person” (1998, p. 52). 
Both ChatGPT and Bard have a clean and standard chatbot 
interface. Text is typed into a text bar and the responses are 
presented right under the typed text, displaying the conver -
sational nature of the interaction. There is a scroll bar on 
the right side and a list of different chats on the left side. 
There are also thumbs up and thumbs down icons for each 
response. Bard, but not ChatGPT, has a microphone icon to 
activate audio input and an audio icon to activate audio out-
put of the response. It’s possible that for novice users, some 
of these interface functionalities and digital objects (e.g., 
text bars, icons, scroll bars, etc.) are present-at-hand. But 
after using them for a while, these functionalities and digital 
objects become transparent-in-use and ready-to-hand. The 
interface (for both desktop and mobile devices) is designed 
for simplicity and ease-of-use. However, there is more to the 
experience of using LLMs than interface functionalities and 
digital objects, which we will outline in the next subsection.
Informational transparency
The phenomenological notion of transparency developed by 
Heidegger, Merleau-Ponty, and others describes a property 
of the relationship between a human using an object such 
as a hammer, cane, or computer mouse. These are mate-
rial objects that we interact with to act on the world. Phe-
nomenological transparency can be also extended to digital 
objects such as text bars, icons, scroll bars, etc. If these don’t 
get into the way of performing a task and mostly withdraw to 
the background, then they are transparent-in-use.
LLMs are not mere tools, they are cognitive artifacts. 
They are artifacts or systems generating informational out-
put (i.e., language, symbols, or computer code) that needs 
to be interpreted and processed by a human user. This infor-
mational output itself can also be transparent or opaque. 
Heersmink characterised informational transparency as 
“the effortlessness with which an agent can interpret and 
understand information” (2015, p. 589). Natural language 
is transparent for humans when the rules and (social) con-
ventions that determine the meaning of language (i.e., syn-
tax, semantics, and pragmatics) are sufficiently understood. 
When a native English speaker reads a sentence like “the 
lecture starts at 9 AM”, he or she can see through the set of 
symbols and understand what they mean.
There are degrees of this sort of transparency. We have 
to learn the meaning of words (semantics), how they are put 
together to form a sentence (syntax), and what they mean in 
particular (social) contexts (pragmatics). When we first start 
learning a language most words are opaque, but as we pro-
gress and learn the meaning of more word symbols, more of 
the language becomes transparent and interpreting the sym-
bols becomes much easier. In terms of using a LLM chatbot, 
the output it generates is informationally transparent when 
the user understands what it means. So, for example, when 
asking,28 “Who was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize?”, 
ChatGPT answered, “Marie Curie was the first woman to 
win a Nobel Prize, in 1903.” This sentence is transparent for 
anyone who can read basic English. Most responses are not 
difficult to understand in terms of the language and if they 
are, users can ask for responses that are easier to understand. 
For the most part, the output they generate is informationally 
transparent.
We suggest that phenomenological and informational 
transparency can contribute to conversational and inter -
actional flow. When users have become accustomed to the 
28 9/8/2023.

--- PDF PAGE 10 ---
 R. Heersmink et al.
41 Page 10 of 15
interface, mostly withdrawing to the background, and the 
style of responses LLMs generate, it becomes easier to use 
them and to engage in exploratory dialogues. It’s not uncom-
mon to tumble into an epistemic rabbit hole, losing track of 
time and focusing only on the epistemic task at hand.
Breakdown and unreadiness‑to‑hand
The interactional flow of a specific chat may break down 
when it generates an obviously false or strange answer. 
Generating a false answer or response is known as halluci-
nating. Again, recognising this depends on the knowledge, 
skills, and attitudes of the user. What’s obviously false for 
one person, may not be so for another. A major problem is 
that, if one isn’t knowledgeable on the topic in question, it is 
impossible to detect when it is hallucinating. For example, 
when asked when the Mona Lisa was painted, the answer 
ChatGPT gave was “Leonardo da Vinci painted the Mona 
Lisa in 1815”. 29 If you don’t already know that Leonardo 
da Vinci was a renaissance painter who lived from 1452 till 
1519, you might not be able to know that this answer is obvi-
ously false. In the context of neural machine translation, Lee 
et al. ( 2018) define hallucinations as “highly pathological 
translations that are completely untethered from the source 
material”. A quick Google search with the question “When 
was the Mona Lisa painted?”, results in a search engine 
results page in which the first ten results (including a Wiki-
pedia page) all give the correct answer. Given that GPT3.5 
is trained on data from the internet (including Wikipedia), 
it is surprising that it gives the wrong answer. Due to the 
lack of data transparency and algorithmic transparency, we 
don’t know why it hallucinates in this case. Whilst ChatGPT 
is generally good at generating accurate answers, it does 
sometimes hallucinate, which is impossible to detect if one 
isn’t already knowledgeable on the topic.
Anthropomorphising as well as interactional flow (facili-
tated by phenomenological and informational transparency) 
can generate an attitude of trust in some users. To various 
degrees, we experience LLMs as (oracular) quasi-others that 
are easy to use, generate answers and responses that are easy 
to understand, and can engage in a dialogue with its user 
that is (for the most part) logical and makes sense from a 
conversational perspective. For these reasons, we tend to 
trust the output they provide. What can also contribute to 
an attitude of trust is that most (though certainly not all) of 
the responses are correct. This attitude of trust towards the 
information it provides is an issue when it hallucinates. As 
soon as a user recognizes that it hallucinates, the user starts 
wondering why it gave the answer it gave, in which case 
the interactional flow may break down. The chatbot then 
becomes unready-to-hand, which means that the user may 
temporarily pause in using it and consciously reflect on the 
answer. It may also cast doubt on the truth-value of the other 
responses it gave.
Epistemology
LLMs clearly serve a number of epistemic functions, from 
answering questions to summarizing texts and synthesizing 
different sources of information. This makes these cogni -
tive artifacts an appropriate target for epistemic assessment. 
Under what conditions do LLMs enhance or obstruct our 
knowledge- and information-seeking practices? In this 
section, we examine the epistemic performance of LLMs 
through the lens of trust and trustworthiness.
Trust is an attitude of the user. Trusting someone—or in 
this case, an instrument—typically involves the expectation 
that the trustee will manifest competence with respect to 
the task they are entrusted (Hawley, 2014). In short, placing 
(epistemic) trust in an LLM entails a willingness to accept 
its deliverances as conducive to our epistemic ends (e.g., 
knowledge or information). By contrast, trustworthiness (or 
lack thereof) concerns a property of the LLM itself. Simion 
and Kelp (2023) define trustworthy AI as “AI that meets 
the norms associated with its proper functioning” (p. 8). A 
trustworthy LLM is competent at fulfilling the epistemic 
tasks associated with its proper functioning. As Jones (2012) 
argues, however, being trustworthy also involves signalling 
to others what tasks one can (or cannot) be entrusted with, so 
others can calibrate their trust correctly. We therefore agree 
with Puri and Keymolen (2023) that systems like ChatGPT 
should be transparent about their limitations.
Opacity, epistemic responsibility, and LLM‑based 
beliefs
Ideally, users should be able to match the level of trust that 
they place in LLMs to the degree that LLMs are trustwor -
thy. However, the previous sections suggest two features 
of LLMs that impede this dynamic. Both (i) their data and 
algorithmic opacity and their (ii) phenomenological and 
informational transparency make it difficult for users to cal-
ibrate their trust correctly. The effects of these limitations 
are twofold: users may adopt unwarranted attitudes of trust 
towards the outputs of LLMs, and the trustworthiness of 
LLMs may be undermined.
In this section, we examine the problem posed by the 
data and algorithmic opacity of the LLMs used by Chat-
GPT and Bard in greater detail. It’s not immediately obvious 
why this opacity presents an epistemic problem. After all, 
29 When I first asked this question in early March 2023, it answered 
1815. However, when I asked the same question in July 2023, it 
answered 1502. So, it learned from its mistakes, perhaps through 
supervised learning, i.e., through feedback given by users.

--- PDF PAGE 11 ---
A phenomenology and epistemology of large language models: transparency, trust, and…
Page 11 of 15 41
human cognitive processes can be opaque too (Zerilli et al., 
2019). To bring the epistemic problem of data and algorith-
mic opacity into focus, we can consider a parallel problem 
in the epistemology of expert testimony: the novice-expert 
problem.
Epistemologists have long recognized the difficulty of 
specifying the conditions under which laypersons are jus-
tified in believing expert testimony, especially when two 
experts disagree (see, e.g., Goldman, 2001). This difficulty 
partly concerns the opacity of expert testimony. Typically, 
laypersons are not in a position to understand either the data 
that experts base their conclusions on or the methods by 
which they reach their conclusions. The average citizen, 
say, lacks the expert training to interpret the climate science 
models that predict global warming, so it will be difficult for 
them to assess which of two disagreeing experts is correct.
The opacity of expert testimony does not, however, mean 
that laypersons are helpless when assessing the trustworthi-
ness of expert testimony. As Goldman (2001) argues, lay -
persons can fall back on various heuristics. These heuristics 
include the (rhetorical) quality of expert arguments, the ‘fit’ 
of these arguments with expert consensus, how the expert’s 
expertise is valued by other experts, evidence of the expert’s 
track record, and evidence of their interests and biases (p. 
91). Using these heuristics, even a novice may be able to tell 
that the balance of evidence speaks in favour of catastrophic 
climate change, and so that an expert who denies this is 
likely wrong.
The novice-expert problem teaches us that opacity can 
pose an epistemic problem, but that it can be overcome with 
heuristic strategies. It's worth considering whether the users 
of ChatGPT and Bard can similarly fall back on heuristics 
to calibrate their trust to match the trustworthiness of the 
tool (despite its data and algorithmic opacity). Of course, 
ChatGPT and Bard are not  experts on a par with human 
experts. They more closely resemble what Simpson (2012) 
calls “surrogate experts”: tools that are incapable of testi-
mony (e.g., that P), but well equipped to point users to rel-
evant information in particular domains (e.g., by summariz-
ing what genuine experts have said about P ). Accordingly, 
laypersons require heuristics to assess whether surrogate 
experts are trustworthy. More research on these heuristics 
is welcome, but we suggest that heuristics of the kind identi-
fied by Goldman provide a good starting point. It would help 
users of ChatGPT and Bard calibrate their trust if they could 
assess the track record of these tools, inspect their biases, 
defer to expert assessments of their reliability, et cetera.
Applying these heuristics, however, is difficult under con-
ditions of data and algorithmic opacity. Consider ChatGPT’s 
track record with respect to its accuracy and reliability, both 
important metrics for the evaluation of instrumental beliefs 
(Sosa, 2006). A growing body of literature speaks to the reli-
ability of ChatGPT in several domains. Notably, ChatGPT 
has passed both legal and medical exams, with the newest 
version of its underlying computational model—GPT4—
outperforming the majority of human test takers (OpenAI, 
2023). While this is an impressive track record, critics argue 
that the reliability of LLMs is likely restricted to bodies of 
knowledge that are amply represented in their training data 
(Munn et al., 2023). This is partly due to the influence of 
common token bias (Zhao et al., 2021). LLMs acquire their 
capabilities by leveraging specific inductive biases and the 
statistical structure of their training datasets. Thus, depend-
ing on their built-in assumptions (inductive biases) and train-
ing data, their reliability may vary across tasks and domains. 
For example, some LLMs may be less reliable, and more 
likely to hallucinate, in domains underrepresented in the 
training dataset or with an idiosyncratic statistical struc -
ture. Less reliable still are LLMs trained on datasets that 
include inaccuracies and misinformation. The problem is 
that data opacity prevents users from evaluating which bod-
ies of knowledge are represented in the training data, making 
it difficult to identify the conditions under which ChatGPT 
and Bard are likely to be trustworthy (e.g., competent at their 
epistemic tasks).
Opacity also presents a problem for other heuristics. 
When users decide whether to trust an LLM, they may want 
to consider evidence of the LLM’s biases. For example, 
Bender et al. (2021) argue that LLMs pick on biases present 
in the data they were trained on. These biases can include 
factual mistakes, “stereotypical associations” and “negative 
sentiments towards specific groups” (p. 614). These biases 
may, but need not, issue in inaccurate beliefs. If an LLM 
disproportionately associates women with domestic roles 
and men with professional roles, for instance, these asso-
ciations are not always incorrect representations of the data. 
However, these biases can contribute to misleading gener -
alizations and a skewed representation of the facts. Without 
knowing what data LLMs are trained on, it’s difficult for 
users to assess what biases may be present in the LLM and 
how this affects their output. Moreover, algorithmic opacity 
can prevent users from assessing what biases the algorithm 
filters out. Combined, these forms of opacity make the heu-
ristic of LLM bias less applicable.30
In light of this, we may want to defer the assessment of 
LLM bias and reliability to other experts, say with knowl-
edge in a particular domain. While Goldman (2001) con-
tends that meta-expert assessment is an important heuristic 
for evaluating expert testimony, however, Grindrod (2019) 
argues that this heuristic is frequently unavailable in the 
case of machine learning algorithms, of which LLMs are an 
example. Complicating the meta-expert assessment of LLMs 
is that machine learning algorithms can be opaque even to 
30 Some developers provide limited information about (attempts to 
reduce) LLM bias (e.g., OpenAI 2023).

--- PDF PAGE 12 ---
 R. Heersmink et al.
41 Page 12 of 15
experts themselves.31 The appeal of LLMs is that they can 
learn autonomously, but this autonomy comes at a cost: the 
computational complexity of sophisticated LLMs makes it 
difficult to explain why a particular prompt elicits a specific 
response. This opacity can give rise to what Grindrod calls 
an “epistemic responsibility gap” (p. 18). The operation of 
most instruments is understood by at least some experts. If 
we want to know whether an instrument is reliable, these 
experts can take epistemic responsibility for the deliver -
ances of that instrument by assuring us that it is working 
correctly. However, no expert is currently in a position to 
take blanket epistemic responsibility for the deliverances of 
such LLMs as Bard and ChatGPT. At most, domain experts 
will be able to assess if a particular deliverance is correct 
or incorrect, and LLM experts will be able to issue broad 
guidance about using LLMs responsibly (e.g., by explaining 
the conditions under which they are likely to hallucinate). 
Meta-expert assessment is therefore less useful as a heuristic 
for the reliability of ChatGPT and Bard, and hence for their 
trustworthiness.
The fact that these heuristics for the trustworthiness of 
LLMs are impoverished makes it difficult for users to cali-
brate their trust correctly, which may lead them to adopt 
unwarranted attitudes of trust towards these systems. But 
while users should strive to match their level of trust to the 
degree of trustworthiness of LLMs, we want to avoid sug-
gesting that the onus falls squarely on users.32 As mentioned 
previously, part of being trustworthy involves signalling to 
others what one can be entrusted with. Since their data and 
algorithmic opacity makes it difficult for users to assess the 
scope of competence of LLMs, this negatively affects the 
trustworthiness of LLMs.
The epistemic trustworthiness of LLMs can be improved 
by increasing their transparency. In a recent survey of the 
transparency of foundation models (of which GPT and 
LaMDA are examples), all major tech companies received 
failing grades (Bommasani et al., 2023). Providing more 
information about the data used to train these models, as 
well as more details about the models themselves, will 
decrease data and algorithmic opacity, signalling to users 
what the capabilities and limitations (broadly, the compe-
tences) of these models are. Moreover, recent work on the 
interpretability of LLMs promises to close epistemic respon-
sibility gaps by enabling expert interpretation of neural net-
works (Bricken et al., 2023), thereby facilitating meta-expert 
assessment. Reducing data and algorithmic opacity thus 
increases our warrant to form computational beliefs on the 
basis of LLMs by facilitating the application of heuristics 
for the reliability of LLMs and makes these LLMs more 
trustworthy.
Finally, it’s worth noting that LLM users can apply some 
heuristics regardless of the opacity of LLMs. Any user could 
verify that the output of ChatGPT and Bard is consistent 
with what they already know. If doubts arise as to the accu-
racy of a certain output, users can also cross-reference the 
output of ChatGPT and Bard with other sources. Hence, 
there are ways of using ChatGPT and Bard in epistemically 
responsible ways despite their opacity.
LLMs, informational transparency, and epistemic 
trust
The data and algorithmic opacity of ChatGPT and Bard 
contrasts starkly with their phenomenological and infor -
mational transparency. The smooth interface of these chat-
bots contributes to conversational and interactional flow, 
withdrawing from conscious attention after repeated use. 
Combined with our tendency to anthropomorphize artifacts 
with human-like features, we suggest this type of transpar -
ency may cause an unwarranted attitude of trust towards the 
output of LLMs as well. This attitude of trust may prevent 
users from applying the sorts of heuristics the previous sec-
tion identified as important. Although users should remain 
vigilant while LLMs remain prone to hallucination and 
inaccuracy, the clear, confident, and articulate way in which 
ChatGPT and Bard present their outputs is instead likely to 
engender undue credence in their responses.
We said that users should match their level of trust to 
the trustworthiness of LLMs. Unfortunately, the phenom -
enology of ChatGPT and Bard makes this difficult. This is 
because the responses of these chatbots have the appearance 
of testimony, without being such. Since different standards 
apply to the assessment of testimony than to the assessment 
of statistical computations, the fact that ChatGPT and Bard 
format their responses as testimony can lead trust to misfire.
The nature of testimonial justification helps explain why  
users may be tempted to trust the output of LLMs too read-
ily. We can distinguish between two broad views on the 
justification of testimonial beliefs: reductionism and non-
reductionism (Leonard 2023). Reductionists claim that we 
require positive reasons for relying on someone’s testimony 
(e.g., Audi, 1997), for instance, evidence of the general reli-
ability of testimony or, as Goldman (2001) emphasizes, evi-
dence of someone’s expertise. Non-reductionists deny that 
we need such reasons, arguing instead that we are entitled 
to believe a speaker’s word blindly unless defeaters indicate 
that the speaker is likely wrong. Burge (1993), for instance, 
claims that we are generally entitled to “accept a proposition 
that is presented as true and that is intelligible to [us]” (p. 
469) because its intelligibility indicates a rational source, 
31 Even when algorithms are not  opaque, this heuristic is unavailable 
when patents or privacy concerns prevent companies from disclosing 
their data or models (Burrell 2016).
32 We thank a reviewer for raising this point, and for pressing us to 
distinguish more clearly between trust and trustworthiness.

--- PDF PAGE 13 ---
A phenomenology and epistemology of large language models: transparency, trust, and…
Page 13 of 15 41
and rational sources are “prima facie source[s] of truth” 
(p. 470). Notice, then, that we can be justified in believing 
someone’s testimony on rather shallow grounds: their intel-
ligibility for Burge, or general evidence about the reliability 
of testimony for some reductionists.
We do not intend to take sides in this debate, but note that 
both views spell trouble for the user who mistakes the output 
of ChatGPT or Bard for testimony. Both chatbots generate 
not only intelligible responses, but confident responses—
even when they are wrong. If non-reductionists like Burge 
are right, the intelligibility of LLM outputs gives users some 
warrant for believing these outputs. 33 It is therefore easy 
to see why users may invest too much trust in ChatGPT 
or Bard. Despite their intelligibility, LLM outputs do not  
originate in a rational source; LLMs are flawed sources of 
truth, as their propensity to hallucinate indicates. Reduc-
tionists fare only slightly better. While reductionists caution 
against blind deference to testimony, the phenomenological 
and informational transparency of ChatGPT and Bard can 
easily ‘trick’ users into believing they have positive reasons 
for believing the outputs of these systems. Among the ‘posi-
tive reasons’ we may have for believing a speaker’s word, 
for instance, is not just that they are intelligible, but also 
that they are smooth, confident, consistent, and articulate. 
These are each features users may to some degree project 
on ChatGPT and Bard, even when they generate hallucina-
tory responses. This may engender trust in ChatGPT and 
Bard when in fact users should be more vigilant (and apply 
other heuristics that do speak to the reliability of statistical 
computational systems).
The phenomenology of LLMs makes it difficult for users 
to calibrate their trust correctly. While users should be vigi-
lant when using LLMs, we—again—want to avoid suggest-
ing that the onus falls on users alone. A trustworthy LLM is 
not just competent at fulfilling the epistemic tasks associated 
with its proper functioning, but also signals to users what it 
is, and is not, competent at. Insofar as the function of LLMs 
is to act as surrogate expert (i.e., a source of reliable infor -
mation), trustworthy LLMs must enable users to calibrate 
their trust correctly. We recommend two ways in which the 
trustworthiness of LLMs can be improved.
First, developers should avoid designing LLMs that con-
fuse users about their status as instruments rather than epis-
temic agents.34 More appropriate designs remind users that 
they are interacting with a statistical model and inform users 
of the limits of LLMs. To some degree, ChatGPT already 
do this by reminding users that, “as AI models,” they cannot 
answer certain prompts (Puri & Keymolen, 2023). But these 
warnings are unlikely to be sufficient: by using first-person 
pronouns and even emojis, ChatGPT and Bard can still leave 
the impression of interacting with an epistemic agent (Véliz, 
2023). Further research on how developers can avoid design-
ing LLMs that are easily anthropomorphized is welcome.
Second, LLMs that function as surrogate experts should 
enable users to assess the reliability of LLM outputs. This 
entails not just increasing the data and algorithmic opacity of 
LLMs; it also entails reducing the phenomenological trans-
parency of LLMs. As Wheeler (2021) argues, it’s difficult to 
scrutinize AI systems that are transparent-in-use: when AI 
systems are transparent, users don’t reflect on the informa-
tion provided by these systems, and thus the inaccuracy or 
bias of the information goes unnoticed. To encourage users 
to reflect on the deliverances of LLMs, one solution would 
be for LLM-powered chatbots to point users to their source 
material whenever they present something as true. Further, 
there is some evidence that LLMs can be trained to recog-
nize when they are hallucinating or generating false outputs 
(Marks & Tegmark, 2023). As this research matures, future 
iterations of ChatGPT and Bard may indicate to users how 
confident they are that a certain response is accurate. These 
confidence scores will make it easier for users to calibrate 
their trust appropriately, and correspondingly increase the 
trustworthiness of these chatbots themselves.
We end with an important observation: increasing the 
trustworthiness of LLMs likely involves trade-offs between 
reflective transparency and conversational flow. Enabling 
users to calibrate their trust appropriately involves increas-
ing the reflective transparency of LLMs by reducing data 
and algorithmic opacity. However, as users are reminded of 
the limits of LLMs and encouraged to approach their outputs 
with vigilance, conversational flow will suffer. Since con-
versational flow is also important to the proper functioning 
of a chatbot, developers should attempt to balance reflective 
transparency and conversational flow.
Conclusion
This paper has first conceptualised LLMs as multifunctional 
computational cognitive artifacts. It then argued that users 
tend to anthropomorphise these systems, establishing an 
alterity relation. Current LLMs are not reflectively trans-
parent, neither in terms of data transparency nor algorithmic 
transparency. They are, for most users, phenomenologically 
and informationally transparent, which results in a conver -
sational and interactional flow. Anthropomorphising and 
conversational flow may cause an (unwarranted) attitude of 
trust towards the output generated by LLMs. We concluded 
33 This may not be true for every user: more advanced users may be 
aware that ChatGPT is prone to hallucination and therefore possess a 
defeater that cancels out their warrant.
34 This is an epistemic version of Schwitzgebel’s (2023) claims about 
moral status.

--- PDF PAGE 14 ---
 R. Heersmink et al.
41 Page 14 of 15
by examining these epistemic pitfalls in greater detail and 
recommended ways of mitigating these pitfalls.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes 
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a 
copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Adamopoulou, E., & Moussiades, L. (2020). Chatbots: History, tech-
nology, and applications. Machine Learning with Applications,  
2, 100006.
Alkaissi, H., & McFarlane, S. (2023). Artificial hallucinations in Chat-
GPT: Implications in scientific writing. Cureus, 15(2), e35179.
Andrada, G., Clowes, R., & Smart, P. (2023). Varieties of transpar -
ency: Exploring agency within AI systems. AI & Society,  38, 
1321–1331.
Arkoudas, K. (2023). ChatGPT is no stochastic parrot. But it also 
claims that 1 is greater than 1. Philosophy & Technology, 36(3), 
54.
Audi, R. (1997). The place of testimony in the fabric of knowledge and 
justification. American Philosophical Quarterly, 34(4), 405–422.
Bender, E. M., Gebru, T., McMillan-Major, A., & Shmitchell, S. 
(2021). On the dangers of stochastic parrots: Can language mod-
els be too big? In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on 
Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (pp. 610–623).
Bird, J. (2011). The phenomenal challenge of designing transparent 
technologies. Interactions, 18(6), 20–23.
Bommasani R, Klyman K, Longpre S, Kapoor S, Maslej N, Xiong B, 
Zhang D, Liang P. (2023). The foundation model transparency 
index.Preprint retrieved from https:// arxiv. org/ abs/ 2310. 12941
Brey, P. (2005). The epistemology and ontology of human-computer 
interaction. Minds & Machines, 15(3–4), 383–398.
Bricken T, Templeton A, Batson J, Chen B, Jermyn A, Conerly T, 
Turner N, Anil C, Denison C, Askell A, Lasenby R. (2023). 
Towards monosemanticity: Decomposing language models with 
dictionary learning. Transformer Circuits Thread. https:// trans 
former- circu its. pub/ 2023/ monos emant ic- featu res
Bruckman, A. (2022). Should you believe Wikipedia? Online com-
munities and the construction of knowledge. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Buckner, C. (2013). Morgan’s canon, meet Hume’s dictum: Avoid-
ing anthropofabulation in cross-species comparisons. Biology 
& Philosophy, 28(5), 853–871.
Burge, T. (1993). Content preservation. The Philosophical Review,  
102(4), 457–488.
Burrell, J. (2016). How the machine ‘thinks’: Understanding opac-
ity in machine learning algorithms. Big Data & Society, 3(1), 
2053951715622512.
Cassinadri, G. (2024). ChatGPT and the technology-education ten-
sion: Applying contextual virtue epistemology to a cognitive 
artifact. Philosophy & Technology, 37, 14.
Chalmers, D. (2023). Could a large language model be conscious? 
Preprint retrieved from https:// doi. org/ 10. 48550/ arXiv. 2303.  
07103
Clark, A. (2003). Natural-born cyborgs: Minds, technologies, and 
the future of human intelligence. Oxford University Press.
Clark, A. (2007). Re-inventing ourselves: The plasticity of embodi-
ment, sensing, and mind. The Journal of Medicine and Philoso-
phy, 32(3), 263–283.
Clark, A., & Chalmers, D. (1998). The extended mind. Analysis,  
58, 7–19.
de Ridder, J. (2022). Online illusions of understanding. Social Epis-
temology. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 02691 728. 2022. 21513 31
Donald, M. (1991). The origins of the modern mind: Three stages 
in the evolution of culture and cognition. Harvard University 
Press.
Dotov, D., Nie, L., & Chemero, A. (2010). A demonstration of the 
transition from ready-to-hand to unready-to-hand. PLoS ONE,  
5(3), e9433.
Dwivedi, Y. K., Kshetri, N., Hughes, L., Slade, E. L., Jeyaraj, A., Kar, 
A. K., Baabdullah, A. M., Koohang, A., Raghavan, V., Ahuja, M., 
& Albanna, H. (2023). “So what if ChatGPT wrote it?” Multidis-
ciplinary perspectives on opportunities, challenges, and implica-
tions of generative conversational AI for research, practice and 
policy. International Journal of Information Management, 71, 
102642.
Fallis, D. (2008). Toward an epistemology of Wikipedia. Journal of 
the American Society for Information Science and Technology,  
59(10), 1662–1674.
Fasoli, M. (2018). Super artifacts: Personal devices as intrinsically 
multifunctional, meta-representational artifacts with a highly vari-
able structure. Minds & Machines, 28, 589–604.
Frost-Arnold, K. (2018). Wikipedia. In J. Chase & D. Coady (Eds.), 
The Routledge Handbook of Applied Epistemology. Routledge.
Frost-Arnold, K. (2023). Who should we be online? A social epistemol-
ogy for the internet. Oxford University Press.
Gillet, A., & Heersmink, R. (2019). How navigation systems transform 
epistemic virtues: Knowledge, issues and solutions. Cognitive Sys-
tems Research, 56, 36–49.
Go, E., & Sundar, S. (2019). Humanizing chatbots: The effects of vis-
ual, identity and conversational cues on humanness perceptions. 
Computers in Human Behavior, 97, 304–316.
Goldman, A. (2001). Experts: Which ones should you trust? Philoso-
phy and Phenomenological Research, 63(1), 85–110.
Grindrod, J. (2019). Computational beliefs. Inquiry. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1080/ 00201 74X. 2019. 16881 78
Gunn, H., & Lynch, M. (2018). Googling. In J. Chase & D. Coady 
(Eds.), The Routledge Handbook of Applied Epistemology. 
Routledge.
Hawley, K. (2014). Trust, distrust and commitment. Noûs, 48(1), 1–20.
Heersmink, R. (2013). A taxonomy of cognitive artifacts: Function, 
information, and categories. Review of Philosophy and Psychol-
ogy, 4(3), 465–481.
Heersmink, R. (2015). Dimensions of integration in embedded and 
extended cognitive systems. Phenomenology and the Cognitive 
Sciences, 14(3), 577–598.
Heersmink, R. (2016). The metaphysics of cognitive artefacts. Philo-
sophical Explorations, 19(1), 78–93.
Heersmink, R. (2018). A virtue epistemology of the internet: Search 
engines, intellectual virtues and education. Social Epistemology,  
32(1), 1–12.
Heersmink, R. (2024). Use of large language models might affect our 
cognitive skills. Nature Human Behaviour. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1038/ s41562- 024- 01859-y
Heidegger, M. (1962). Being and time. SCM.
Hu, K. (2023). ChatGPT sets record for fastest-growing user base—
analyst note. Reuters. URL: https:// www. reute rs. com/ techn  

--- PDF PAGE 15 ---
A phenomenology and epistemology of large language models: transparency, trust, and…
Page 15 of 15 41
ology/ chatg pt- sets- record- faste st- growi ng- user- base- analy 
st- note- 2023- 02- 01/
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. MIT Press.
Ihde, D. (1990). Technology and the lifeworld: From garden to earth. 
Indiana University Press.
Jones, K. (2012). Trustworthiness. Ethics, 123(1), 61–85.
Kirsh, D., & Maglio, P. (1994). On distinguishing epistemic from prag-
matic action. Cognitive Science, 18(4), 513–549.
Lee, K., Firat, O., Agarwal, A., Fannjiang, C., & Sussillo, D. (2018). 
Hallucinations in neural machine translation. ICLR 2019.
Leonard, N. (2023). Epistemological problems of testimony. Zalta, 
E.N. & Nodelman, U. (Eds.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Phi-
losophy. URL: https:// plato. stanf ord. edu/ archi ves/ spr20 23/ entri 
es/ testi mony- episp rob
Lynch, M. (2016). The Internet of us: Knowing more and understand-
ing less in the age of big data. W.W. Norton and Company.
Magnus, P. (2009). On trusting Wikipedia. Episteme, 6(1), 74–90.
Marks, S. & Tegmark, M. (2023). The geometry of truth: Emergent lin-
ear structure in large language model representations of true/false 
datasets. Preprint retrieved from https:// arxiv. org/ abs/ 2310. 06824
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1965). Phenomenology of perception. Routledge.
Miller, B., & Record, I. (2013). Justified belief in a digital age: On the 
epistemic implications of secret Internet technologies. Episteme,  
10(2), 117–134.
Miller, B., & Record, I. (2017). Responsible epistemic technologies: 
A social-epistemological analysis of autocompleted web search. 
New Media & Society, 19(12), 1945–1963.
Munn, L., Magee, L., & Arora, V. (2023). Truth machines: Synthesiz-
ing veracity in AI language models. AI & Society. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1007/ s00146- 023- 01756-4
Munton, J. (2022). Answering machines: How to (epistemically) evalu-
ate a search engine. Inquiry. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 00201 74X. 
2022. 21407 07
Narayanan, D., & De Cremer, D. (2022). “Google told me so!” On 
the bent testimony of search engine algorithms. Philosophy & 
Technology, 35, 22.
Neff, G., & Nagy, P. (2016). Talking to bots: Symbiotic agency and 
the case of Tay. International Journal of Communication, 10, 
4915–4931.
Newen, A., de Bruin, L., & Gallagher, S. (2018). The Oxford Handbook 
of 4E Cognition. Oxford University Press.
Norman, D. (1991). Cognitive artifacts. In J. Carroll (Ed.), Designing 
interaction: Psychology at the human-computer interface (pp. 
17–38). Cambridge University Press.
Norman, D. (1993). Things that make us smart: Defending human 
attributes in the age of the machine. Basic Books.
Norman, D. (1998). The invisible computer. MIT Press.
OpenAI. (2023). GPT-4 System Card. https:// cdn. openai. com/ papers/ 
gpt-4. pdf
Palermos, S. O. (2011). Belief-forming processes, extended. Review of 
Philosophy and Psychology, 2, 741–765.
Puri, A., & Keymolen, E. (2023). Of ChatGPT and trustworthy AI. 
Journal of Human-Technology Relations. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
59490/ jhtr. 2023.1. 7028
Rupert, R. (2010). Extended cognition and the priority of cognitive 
systems. Cognitive Systems Research, 11, 343–356.
Salles, A., Evers, K., & Farisco, M. (2020). Anthropomorphism in AI. 
AJOB Neuroscience, 11(2), 88–95.
Schwengerer, L. (2021). Online intellectual virtues and the extended 
mind. Social Epistemology, 35(3), 312–322.
Schwitzgebel, E. (2023). AI systems must not confuse users about their 
sentience or moral status. Patterns, 4(8), 100818.
Shanahan, M. (2024). Talking about large language models. Commu-
nications of the ACM, 67(2), 68–79.
Simion, M., & Kelp, C. (2023). Trustworthy artificial intelligence. 
Asian Journal of Philosophy, 2(1), 8.
Simpson, D. (2012). Evaluating Google as an epistemic tool. Metaphi-
losophy, 43(4), 426–445.
Smart, P., & Clowes, R. (2021). Intellectual virtues and internet-
extended knowledge. Social Epistemology Review and Reply 
Collective, 10(1), 7–21.
Smart, P., & Shadbolt, N. (2018). The world wide web. In J. Chase & 
D. Coady (Eds.), Routledge handbook of applied epistemology. 
Routledge.
Sosa, E. (2006). Knowledge: Instrumental and testimonial. In J. Lackey 
& E. Sosa (Eds.), The epistemology of testimony (pp. 116–123). 
Oxford University Press.
Tiku, N. (2022). The Google engineer who thinks the company’s AI 
has come to life. URL: https:// www. washi ngton post. com/ techn 
ology/ 2022/ 06/ 11/ google- ai- lamda- blake- lemoi ne/
Varela, F. J., Thompson, E., & Rosch, E. (1991). The embodied mind: 
Cognitive science and human experience. MIT Press.
Véliz, C. (2023). Chatbots shouldn’t use emojis. Nature, 615, 375.
Verbeek, P. P. (2015). Toward a theory of technological mediation: 
A program for postphenomenological research. In J. K. Berg, O. 
Friis, & R. Crease (Eds.), Technoscience and postphenomenology: 
The Manhattan papers (pp. 189–204). Lexington Books.
von Eschenbach, W. J. (2021). Transparency and the black box prob-
lem: Why we do not trust AI. Philosophy and Technology, 34, 
1607–1622.
Weizenbaum, J. (1966). ELIZA a computer program for the study of 
natural language communication between man and machine. Com-
munications of the ACM, 9(1), 36–45.
Wheeler, M. (2021). Between transparency and intrusion in smart 
machines [Entre la transparence et l’intrusion des machines intel-
ligentes]. Perspectives interdisciplinaires sur le travail et la santé 
(PISTES).
Wheeler, M. (2019). The reappearing tool: Transparency, smart tech-
nology, and the extended mind. AI & Society, 34(4), 857–866.
Wolfram, S. (2023). What Is ChatGPT Doing and Why Does It Work? 
URL: https:// writi ngs. steph enwol fram. com/ 2023/ 02/ what- is- chatg 
pt- ng- and- why- does- it- work/
Zerilli, J., Knott, A., Maclaurin, J., & Gavaghan, C. (2019). Transpar-
ency in algorithmic and human decision-making: Is there a double 
standard? Philosophy & Technology, 32, 661–683.
Zhao T., Wallace E., Feng S., Klein D., & Singh S. (2021). Calibrate 
before use: improving few-shot performance of language mod-
els. Preprint retrieved from https:// doi. org/ 10. 48550/ arXiv. 2102. 
09690
Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.