--- PDF PAGE 1 ---
. 
. 
Latest updates: hps://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3639476.3639770
. 
. 
RESEARCH-ARTICLE
Towards Trustworthy AI Soware Development Assistance
DANIEL MANINGER, Technical University of Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Hessen, Germany
. 
KRISHNA NARASIMHAN
. 
M. MEZINI, Technical University of Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Hessen, Germany
. 
. 
. 
Open Access Support provided by:
. 
Technical University of Darmstadt
. 
PDF Download
3639476.3639770.pdf
23 January 2026
Total Citations: 4
Total Downloads: 1083
. 
. 
Published: 14 April 2024
. 
. 
Citation in BibTeX format
. 
. 
ICSE-NIER'24: 2024 ACM/IEEE 44th
International Conference on Soware
Engineering: New Ideas and Emerging
Results
April 14 - 20, 2024
Lisbon, Portugal
. 
. 
Conference Sponsors:
SIGSOFT
ICSE-NIER'24: Proceedings of the 2024 ACM/IEEE 44th International Conference on Soware Engineering: New Ideas and Emerging Results (April 2024)
hps://doi.org/10.1145/3639476.3639770
ISBN: 9798400705007
.


--- PDF PAGE 2 ---
Towards Trustworthy AI Software Development Assistance
Daniel Maninger∗
Technische Universität Darmstadt
Darmstadt, Germany
daniel.maninger@tu-darmstadt.de
Krishna Narasimhan†
AI Quality & Testing Hub
Frankfurt am Main, Germany
k.narasimhan@aiqualityhub.com
Mira Mezini‡§
Technische Universität Darmstadt
Darmstadt, Germany
mezini@cs.tu-darmstadt.de
ABSTRACT
It is expected that in the near future, AI software development assis-
tants will play an important role in the software industry. However,
current software development assistants tend to be unreliable, often
producing incorrect, unsafe, or low-quality code. We seek to resolve
these issues by introducing a holistic architecture for constructing,
training, and using trustworthy AI software development assistants.
In the center of the architecture, there is a foundational LLM trained
on datasets representative of real-world coding scenarios and com-
plex software architectures, and fine-tuned on code quality criteria
beyond correctness. The LLM will make use of graph-based code
representations for advanced semantic comprehension. We envision
a knowledge graph integrated into the system to provide up-to-date
background knowledge and to enable the assistant to provide appro-
priate explanations. Finally, a modular framework for constrained
decoding will ensure that certain guarantees (e.g., for correctness
and security) hold for the generated code.
ACM Reference Format:
Daniel Maninger, Krishna Narasimhan, and Mira Mezini. 2024. Towards
Trustworthy AI Software Development Assistance. InNew Ideas and Emerg-
ing Results (ICSE-NIER’24), April 14–20, 2024, Lisbon, Portugal. ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 5 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3639476.3639770
1 INTRODUCTION
Software development (SD) is a complex, expensive process [3]. In
times of ever-increasing digitalization of our society and scarcity of
IT talent, it makes sense to (partially) automate this process – the
popularity that AI-assisted code generation has gained since the
appearance of large language models (LLMs) indicates this need. At
the same time, given that software dominates our digitized society,
guaranteeing the quality of the generated code is paramount. More-
over, for the acceptance of AI software development assistants, it
is essential that they cover a broad range of software engineering
tasks and faithfully mimic existing well-understood and proven SD
methods and practices.
∗Also with Hessian Center for Artificial Intelligence (hessian.AI).
†Work conducted while afiliated with Technische Universität Darmstadt.
‡Also with Hessian Center for Artificial Intelligence (hessian.AI).
§Also with National Research Center for Applied Cybersecurity ATHENE.
ICSE-NIER’24, April 14–20, 2024, Lisbon, Portugal
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0500-7/24/04.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3639476.3639770
Although existing LLMs, when pre-trained or fine-tuned on code1,
have shown promise in handling coding-related queries and synthe-
sizing coherent-looking code, they exhibit concerning issues. For
instance, AIs like ChatGPT produce erroneous code suggestions: On
Stack Overflow, the large number of ChatGPT-generated inaccurate
answers led to a ban on its use. The moderators stated that “the
posting of answers created by ChatGPT [. . . ] is substantially harmful
to the site and to users who are asking questions and looking for correct
answers”2. A later study made similar observations [12].
Moreover, a study on GitHub Copilot revealed that 40% of the gen-
erated code contained critical security vulnerabilities [24]. Further
emphasizing the dangers of such issues in the domain of software
engineering is an investigation that discovered that “participants
who had access to the AI assistant were more likely to introduce security
vulnerabilities [. . . ], yet also more likely to rate their insecure answers
as secure”[25]. These studies highlight quality and security problems
with current industrial AI software development assistants.
To remedy these problems, we seek to establish the foundations
of a next-generation AI software development assistant system3.
Given the software engineer’s natural language queries, the as-
sistant should suggest high-quality code, i.e., correct but also se-
cure, readable, and otherwise compliant with best practices. So far,
code model research has focused almost exclusively on correctness
(e.g., [5, 8, 14, 17, 18, 31]).
Beyond that, the assistant should be able to serve the role of a
virtual pair programmer, explaining its suggestions, helping with
debugging, etc., similar to how a human would. The positive effects
of pair programming practices on code correctness and quality [36],
as well as on collaborative learning [22], are well known. Despite this,
pair programming has not been widely adopted because working
closely with a teammate is challenging4. A virtual pair programmer
would not cause such problems. Moreover, we envision the system
we build as an AI counterpart to the traditional DevOps pipeline.
Therefore, our assistant should be able to support the software en-
gineer in all phases, from software design to deployment.
The listed objectives are highly ambitious and require addressing
various challenges. This paper is intended to outline a way forward
for us and other researchers trying to develop better AI software
development assistants. To this end, we start by identifying five key
challenges:
(1) lack of representative datasets,
(2) difficulties capturing code structure and semantics,
(3) low code quality,
(4) insufficient explanations, and
1For brevity, we will use the termcode model.
2https://meta.stackoverflow.com/questions/421831/temporary-policy-chatgpt-is-banned
3For brevity, we will also refer to it simply as(AI SD) assistant.
4https://martinfowler.com/articles/on-pair-programming.html#Challenges
This work licensed under Creative Commons Attribution International 4.0 License.
112
2024 IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on Software Engineering: New Ideas and Emerging Results (ICSE-
NIER)

--- PDF PAGE 3 ---
ICSE-NIER’24, April 14–20, 2024, Lisbon, Portugal Maninger et al.
(5) no guarantees on the results.
We then propose fivesolutions to address these challenges:
(1) curated real-world datasets,
(2) graph representations of code,
(3) fine-tuning through feedback from code analyses
(4) enriched code knowledge graphs, and
(5) constrained decoding.
Our considerations lead to a holistic multi-component architecture
for AI software development assistant systems built around a central
code model. It is illustrated in Figure 1.
2 APPROACH
The first step towards improving current AI software development
assistants is to understand their limitations. Here, we elaborate on
the five challenges we found to be most relevant. For each of them,
we propose a possible solution together with an evaluation plan.
All the described ideas contribute to the overall goal of this vision:
Creating a trustworthy AI SD assistant that a software engineer can
use in real-world software projects without having to worry about
the correctness, quality, safety, and security of the generated code.
2.1 Representative Datasets
Challenge. Popular code datasets5 such as CodeSearchNet6 [11]
and Py150K7 consists of individual code snippets with single func-
tions. Such datasets do not represent real-world software, typically
exhibiting complex software patterns, interdependent class hierar-
chies, project dependencies involving multiple interconnected files,
and further complexities. A study by Hellendoorn et al. [10] revealed
that the absence of these features in coding benchmarks contributed
to many shortcomings of code completion systems. We, therefore,
consider the lack of high-quality datasets that accurately represent
real-world coding patterns and complex software architectures a key
challenge for training code models. However, real-world code suit-
able for creating such datasets is scarce. Moreover, annotating and
curating code datasets requires significant code quality and dataset
management expertise.
Envisioned solution. To meet this challenge, we plan to compile
and curate a comprehensive dataset of code that accurately reflects
common real-world coding patterns and software structures. For
this, we will build upon established state-of-the-art datasets. To
make these datasets representative, we will devise heuristics rooted
in general coding patterns observed in real-world coding practices.
Hellendoorn et al. introduced initial heuristics for the C# program-
ming language to distinguish real-world completions from synthetic
ones, such as length, type, and origin of (syntactic) tokens. We will
expand on these heuristics in a generalized manner for other popular
languages, including Java, Python, and C.
We will annotate our dataset with qualitative metrics to ensure
we train with high-quality code. We will rely on various techniques
to accurately label the dataset, including static code analysis tools,
Stack Overflow discussions, and GitHub issue trackers. While min-
ing GitHub repositories, strategies must be adopted to circumvent
known pitfalls [13]. When extracting labels from Stack Overflow,
5With closed-source commercial code models, the datasets used are often unknown.
6https://github.com/github/CodeSearchNet
7https://www.sri.inf.ethz.ch/py150
we will address challenges posed by incomplete and unstructured
code suggestions in the discussions by exploring automated program
repair approaches [7].
Evaluation. To evaluate the impact of the representative dataset,
we will train code models like CodeBert [5], AlphaCode [18], and
TravTrans [14] on vanilla versions of CodeSearchNet. Subsequently,
we will curate a variant of CodeSearchNet that represents real-world
coding patterns and retrain the models on it. We then compare the
differently trained model variants with each other. Standard metrics
such as exact match score, statement-level accuracy, or BLEU [23]
are of limited value here, because programming tasks can be solved
in multiple ways and different looking programs can be semantically
equivalent [28]. Therefore, we will evaluate the model performance
using CodeBLEU [28], which also considers abstract syntax trees
and data flow. Additionally, we will explore the use of techniques
like semantic parsing and program analysis to estimate the semantic
similarity of code segments.
2.2 Capturing Code Structure and Semantics
Challenge. In Section 1, we gave some examples of issues with
state-of-the-art AI SD assistants, particularly their shortcomings in
generating correct and secure code. Note that these are errors at the
semantic level. How and to what extent code models can capture and
respect program semantics remains an open research question8. One
conceivable factor is that current code models treat code as formatted
text and discard crucial semantic information such as control or
data flow [4], implicit usage constraints of third-party libraries, and
domain-specific knowledge. It remains unclear what representations
of code and SD knowledge should be used by these models.
Envisioned solution. To quantify the problems with current tex-
tual code representations, we are developing an analysis technique
to assess how much of a program’s semantics transformer models
learn to capture. We do this by calculating theirsemantic precision
and recall, i.e., how well the models’ attention maps match the codes’
control and data flow graphs. We will also consider thegraph edit
distance [6] between them.
Further, since most semantic-rich representations of code are
graph-based – control flow graphs, data flow graphs, call graphs –
code models may benefit from native support of graph-based repre-
sentations. To this end, we will explore different approaches and in-
vestigate their impact on the quality of suggested code: Firstly, we will
work on flattening graph representations for code and using them as
training data for sequence-based transformers. Positional encodings
specialized for graph structures [
31] may be instrumental in teaching
the model how to interpret its input sequences correctly. Secondly,
approaches related to graph attention networks [33] and attention
masking [20] will be worth exploring, as they enable constraints on
graph relations to be injected directly into the transformer’s atten-
tion heads. Thirdly, we will explore the potential of graph neural
networks [
39] and graph transformers [37] to operate directly on
graph-based code representations. We will investigate the trade-offs
8Earlier works have attempted to investigate this question for code transformers
trained on abstract syntax tree (AST) representations [34]. However, such studies are
limited, as ASTs may not capture program semantics very well, and the approaches
cannot easily be adapted to new models.
113

--- PDF PAGE 4 ---
Towards Trustworthy AI Software Development Assistance ICSE-NIER’24, April 14–20, 2024, Lisbon, Portugal
C
ritic
Pr
ogram code
Tok
en-wise feedback
Pr
ompt
S
oftware
engineer
Re
presentative
dataset
C
ode
knowledge
graph
G
raph-based
code model
Rea
l-world code,
issues, & discussions
Cons
trained
decoding
1
2 3
4
5
Figure 1: High-level architecture of our envisioned AI software development assistant. It consists of five main components:
(1) A curated training dataset representing real-world coding patterns and software architectures. (2) A foundational code
model that uses graph representations for better understanding of program semantics. (3) An RL-based feedback mechanism to
fine-tune the model for improved code quality. (4) A semantically enriched code knowledge graph to help the assistant explain
its code. (5) A modular constrained decoding framework on top of the model that prevents the generation of undesired code.
between all three approaches. Potentially, this effort will lead to a
foundational code model with increased semantic awareness.
Evaluation. To evaluate the semantic awareness of our graph-
based code models, we will use the novel analysis technique de-
scribed above. Additionally, to evaluate their robustness, we ran-
domly select code artifacts and make semantic-preserving changes
to them – renaming variables, translating for-statements into while-
statements, etc. In a robust semantic-aware model, such semantics-
preserving changes should typically not be reflected in large-scale
changes to the attention maps. We will also compare the performance
of the semantic-aware foundational code models we build with stan-
dard models like CodeBert, TravTrans, and GraphCodeBert [8] on
downstream tasks using the metrics mentioned in Subsection 2.1.
2.3 Code Quality
Challenge. Human software engineers receive feedback on their
code as they write it through automated tools like compiler checks
and linters, or from colleagues during pair programming and code
reviews. Such feedback loops can have a very positive impact on code
quality. For example, studies on pair programming report fewer bugs,
better readability, higher test coverage and passing rates, and other
benefits [36]. Code models, on the other hand, lack similar mecha-
nisms. They are typically optimized for accuracy, not for qualitative
criteria. We believe that a reliable AI SD assistant should provide
code that not only accurately reflects existing code patterns, but is
also of high quality according to well-established quality criteria
and best practices.
Envisioned solution. Inspired by the feedback loop described above,
we propose an approach based on reinforcement learning (RL) to
fine-tune code models for multiple code quality criteria. The ap-
proach shares ideas with actor–critic RL [
15], where, in our case,
the code model takes the actor’s role, and one or more code analysis
tools serve as critics. Each critic evaluates the code generated by
the actor and returns a token-wise reward value. The rewards are
then aggregated (and traded off against each other) using utility
functions known from multi-objective RL [9]. Finally, the policy gra-
dient is used to update the actor model, e.g., through proximal policy
optimization (PPO) [30].
While ideas with actor–critic RL have recently been explored
for program correctness [17], our setting has a number of special
characteristics that are not systematically explored: Since there is
no universal metric for code quality, we resort to multiple critics,
each specializing in one or more qualitative aspects. Possible crit-
ics for general best practices are linters and similar static analysis
tools. To optimize security aspects, specialized security checkers like
CogniCrypt [16] or CryptoGuard [27] can be used. One could also
consider more subjective criteria such as readability metrics [29]. In
our setting, critics must provide individual rewards for each token.
This enables reward shaping and, thus, more efficient learning, as
it conveys to the actor which actions (i.e., generated tokens) were
particularly good or bad. Despite this, our setting has the benefit that
we can generate a complete program before applying the critics to
it. This allows us to use a wide variety of critics, even if they cannot
handle partial (incomplete) programs. Lastly, we must point out
that multi-objective RL with many (i.e., four or more) objectives is
considered a hard problem [9]. In our case, however, the different
code quality objectives can be assumed to be mostly non-conflicting.
Therefore, there is no need to find all Pareto-optimal policies – one is
sufficient – which allows us to use much more efficient algorithms.
Evaluation. The effects of our code quality fine-tuning approach
can be measured by a direct comparison of variants of a code model
before and after fine-tuning. The same tools used as critics can be
used to evaluate the code generated by the two variants. In addition,
the code should be audited and rated by humans experts. For most
code quality criteria, any coding benchmark is suitable, while spe-
cialized benchmarks like LLMSecEval [32] can be used to evaluate
safety and security criteria.
2.4 Explainability
Challenge. Current code models are not designed to base their
answers on concrete background knowledge and use that knowledge
114

--- PDF PAGE 5 ---
ICSE-NIER’24, April 14–20, 2024, Lisbon, Portugal Maninger et al.
to account for their answers to the user. While instruction fine-tuned
(code) models [38] often add explanations to their answers, these
answers are the result of purely statistical computations and may be
hallucinated. For instance, a recent study by Kabir et al. [12] found
that ChatGPT answered Stack Overflow questions incorrectly half
of the time. In our view, the issue of how to enable LLMs to provide
correct and appropriate explanations for code remains unresolved.
Envisioned solution. For this challenge, we plan to investigate how
to integrate code knowledge graphs (CKGs) into our AI SD assistant.
This way, we want to give the assistant access to a rich, easily updat-
able source of background knowledge that it can ground its generated
code and explanations in. A potential subject for our investigation is
IBM’s GraphGen4Code9 [1]. This CKG is a set of triplets describing
relationships (edges) between entities (nodes). For a given piece of
code, the corresponding CKG contains nodes for each statement,
with edges signifying control and data flow. Additionally, GraphGen-
4Code has established initial semantic links between code fragments
and corresponding forum discussions on Stack Overflow. However,
the expressiveness of these name-based links is rather superficial.
To improve the expressiveness of the relationships between code
and knowledge sources, we propose to enrich GraphGen4Code with
information about the task to which a particular code description
or forum post relates. This information can be obtained using intent
classification. Moreover, while Stack Overflow is a valuable source
of discussions about and fixes to programming issues, the GitHub
issue tracker can be another equally important source of such infor-
mation. We thus propose to add links between code segments and
GitHub issues to the CKG, along with additional information, such
as whether a pull request successfully fixed the corresponding issue.
How to integrate the CKG into the assistant remains to be deter-
mined. One option is to augment the code model to query the CKG
during the generation of its answer – several papers have already
demonstrated how to teach LLMs to use external tools or APIs [21].
Alternatively, in a post-processing step, the CKG could be searched
for code segments similar to the generated one. Then, the model
could do a second pass over the generated code, using the retrieved
information to “decorate” the generated code with explanations. In
order to find relevant code samples in the CKG, a separate retriever
model could be used [19].
Evaluation. To evaluate the extended CKG’s ability to be inte-
grated into the assistant and provide accurate and appropriate expla-
nations to the software engineer, we will utilize evaluation protocols
similar to those used to evaluate the original GraphGen4Code. We
will involve human annotators and design an agreement metric to
rank the quality of the assistant’s suggestions and explanations. We
will also evaluate the computing cost of enhancing large CKG’s with
complex semantic links and new sources of information.
2.5 Controlled Code Generation
Challenge. All measures presented so far serve to enhance the
capabilities of the AI SD assistant. However, due to the statistical na-
ture of LLMs, even the best model may occasionally produce bad (e.g.,
incorrect, insecure, or low-quality) results. This lack of guarantees
is a major hindrance to the trustworthiness of AI SD assistants.
9https://wala.github.io/graph4code/
Envisioned solution. To provide the desired guarantees, we pro-
pose to equip the assistant withconstrained (a.k.a. guided) decoding
(e.g., [26]) – a recently popular extension of the decoding algorithms
of causal LLMs that enforces compliance with certain rules for the
generated text. At each generation step, all tokens that would lead
to a violation of the rules are prevented from being generated by
setting their probability to zero before applying the regular decoding
strategy. The underlying rules can, e.g., be defined through regular
expressions or grammars and the implementations can be very ef-
ficient [35]. This approach has already been applied to coding tasks,
where it could, among other things, ensure syntactic correctness [26]
and prevent hallucinations [2]. Models equipped with constrained
decoding often outperform larger models [2, 26, 35].
Since constrained decoding rules can be implemented and applied
independently of each other, we envision a modular constrained
decoding framework on top of the central code model. The modu-
larity allows the user to select a ruleset appropriate for the current
programming language and domain. There is a wide variety of rules
that could be implemented. Constrained decoding is, however, no
replacement for a capable code model for three reasons: rules must
be checkable given only a programprefix; for efficiency reasons, they
should be incremental, i.e., not require reanalysis of the program at
each generation step; and, depending on the complexity of the rules,
the constraints may beunsound and/or incomplete. Still, the lower
bound on code quality, and thus the trustworthiness of the assistant,
that constrained decoding provides is very valuable.
Evaluation. Measuring how effective constrained decoding is
in preventing undesired outputs is easy: First, we performuncon-
strained decoding on a series of prompts. Then we iterate over the
output sequences using the constrained decoding framework and
count in how many cases at least one of the rules was violated (and
the constrained decoding would have intervened). This could also be
insightful as it reveals typical errors made by unconstrained models.
On the other hand, rules can be overly strict and guide the decoding
into “dead ends” where the model can only terminate the generation
or produce degenerate (i.e., valid but useless) results. How common
this is compared to unconstrained decoding can be determined via
standard benchmarks. The outcome of the described evaluations will
of course highly depend on the used foundation model and ruleset.
3 FUTURE PLANS
The vision presented in this paper encompasses multiple ideas, all
working towards creating a trustworthy AI software development
assistant. Despite this, each idea is independent enough to form its
own line of research. Therefore, they are worked on in parallel by
different subgroups of researchers and lead to several full papers. At
the current state, all components are conceptualized but still need
to be implemented and evaluated as described above. Combining all
outcomes to build the described programming assistant is a highly
ambitious goal and will take several years to realize.
4 CONCLUSION
In this paper, we shared our understanding of the shortcomings of cur-
rent code models and presented our vision of how they can be over-
come. We considered aspects such as representative datasets, seman-
tic code representations, code quality, explainability, and guarantees.
115

--- PDF PAGE 6 ---
Towards Trustworthy AI Software Development Assistance ICSE-NIER’24, April 14–20, 2024, Lisbon, Portugal
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Funded by the Hessian Ministry of Higher Education, Research,
Science and the Arts within the cluster projectThe Third Wave of
Artificial Intelligence (3AI).
REFERENCES
[1] Ibrahim Abdelaziz, Julian Dolby, Jamie P. McCusker, and Kavitha Srinivas. 2021. A
Toolkit for Generating Code Knowledge Graphs. InK-CAP ’21: Knowledge Capture
Conference, Virtual Event, USA, December 2-3, 2021. ACM, 137–144.
[2] Lakshya A Agrawal, Aditya Kanade, Navin Goyal, Shuvendu K. Lahiri, and
Sriram K. Rajamani. 2023. Guiding Language Models of Code with Global Context
using Monitors. CoRR abs/2306.10763 (2023).
[3] Barry W. Boehm, Chris Abts, and Sunita Chulani. 2000. Software development
cost estimation approaches - A survey.Ann. Softw. Eng.10 (2000), 177–205.
[4] Saikat Chakraborty, Rahul Krishna, Yangruibo Ding, and Baishakhi Ray. 2022.
Deep Learning Based Vulnerability Detection: Are We There Yet? IEEE Trans.
Software Eng. 48, 9 (2022), 3280–3296.
[5] Zhangyin Feng, Daya Guo, Duyu Tang, Nan Duan, Xiaocheng Feng, Ming
Gong, Linjun Shou, Bing Qin, Ting Liu, Daxin Jiang, and Ming Zhou. 2020.
CodeBERT: A Pre-Trained Model for Programming and Natural Languages. In
Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020, Online
Event, 16-20 November 2020 (Findings of ACL), Vol. EMNLP 2020. Association for
Computational Linguistics, 1536–1547.
[6] Xinbo Gao, Bing Xiao, Dacheng Tao, and Xuelong Li. 2010. A survey of graph
edit distance. Pattern Anal. Appl.13, 1 (2010), 113–129.
[7] Claire Le Goues, Michael Pradel, and Abhik Roychoudhury. 2019. Automated
program repair. Commun. ACM 62, 12 (2019), 56–65.
[8] Daya Guo, Shuo Ren, Shuai Lu, Zhangyin Feng, Duyu Tang, Shujie Liu, Long
Zhou, Nan Duan, Alexey Svyatkovskiy, Shengyu Fu, Michele Tufano, Shao Kun
Deng, Colin B. Clement, Dawn Drain, Neel Sundaresan, Jian Yin, Daxin Jiang,
and Ming Zhou. 2021. GraphCodeBERT: Pre-training Code Representations with
Data Flow. In9th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2021,
Virtual Event, Austria, May 3-7, 2021. OpenReview.net.
[9] Conor F. Hayes, Roxana Radulescu, Eugenio Bargiacchi, Johan Källström, Matthew
Macfarlane, Mathieu Reymond, Timothy Verstraeten, Luisa M. Zintgraf, Richard
Dazeley, Fredrik Heintz, Enda Howley, Athirai A. Irissappane, Patrick Mannion,
Ann Nowé, Gabriel de Oliveira Ramos, Marcello Restelli, Peter Vamplew, and
Diederik M. Roijers. 2022. A practical guide to multi-objective reinforcement
learning and planning. Auton. Agents Multi Agent Syst. 36, 1 (2022), 26.
[10] Vincent J. Hellendoorn, Sebastian Proksch, Harald C. Gall, and Alberto Bacchelli.
2019. When code completion fails: a case study on real-world completions. In
Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Software Engineering, ICSE 2019,
Montreal, QC, Canada, May 25-31, 2019. IEEE / ACM, 960–970.
[11] Hamel Husain, Ho-Hsiang Wu, Tiferet Gazit, Miltiadis Allamanis, and Marc
Brockschmidt. 2019. CodeSearchNet Challenge: Evaluating the State of Semantic
Code Search. CoRR abs/1909.09436 (2019).
[12] Samia Kabir, David N. Udo-Imeh, Bonan Kou, and Tianyi Zhang. 2023. Who
Answers It Better? An In-Depth Analysis of ChatGPT and Stack Overflow
Answers to Software Engineering Questions. CoRR abs/2308.02312 (2023).
[13] Eirini Kalliamvakou, Georgios Gousios, Kelly Blincoe, Leif Singer, Daniel M.
Germán, and Daniela E. Damian. 2014. The promises and perils of mining GitHub.
In 11th Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories, MSR 2014, Proceedings,
May 31 - June 1, 2014, Hyderabad, India. ACM, 92–101.
[14] Seohyun Kim, Jinman Zhao, Yuchi Tian, and Satish Chandra. 2021. Code Prediction
by Feeding Trees to Transformers. In 43rd IEEE/ACM International Conference
on Software Engineering, ICSE 2021, Madrid, Spain, 22-30 May 2021. IEEE, 150–162.
[15] Vijay R. Konda and John N. Tsitsiklis. 1999. Actor-Critic Algorithms. InAdvances
in Neural Information Processing Systems 12, [NIPS Conference, Denver, Colorado,
USA, November 29 - December 4, 1999]. The MIT Press, 1008–1014.
[16] Stefan Krüger, Sarah Nadi, Michael Reif, Karim Ali, Mira Mezini, Eric Bodden,
Florian Göpfert, Felix Günther, Christian Weinert, Daniel Demmler, and Ram
Kamath. 2017. CogniCrypt: supporting developers in using cryptography. In
Proceedings of the 32nd IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software
Engineering, ASE 2017, Urbana, IL, USA, October 30 - November 03, 2017. IEEE
Computer Society, 931–936.
[17] Hung Le, Yue Wang, Akhilesh Deepak Gotmare, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Chu-
Hong Hoi. 2022. CodeRL: Mastering Code Generation through Pretrained Models
and Deep Reinforcement Learning. InNeurIPS.
[18] Yujia Li, David H. Choi, Junyoung Chung, Nate Kushman, Julian Schrittwieser,
Rémi Leblond, Tom Eccles, James Keeling, Felix Gimeno, Agustin Dal Lago,
Thomas Hubert, Peter Choy, Cyprien de Masson d’Autume, Igor Babuschkin,
Xinyun Chen, Po-Sen Huang, Johannes Welbl, Sven Gowal, Alexey Cherepanov,
James Molloy, Daniel J. Mankowitz, Esme Sutherland Robson, Pushmeet Kohli,
Nando de Freitas, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Oriol Vinyals. 2022. Competition-Level
Code Generation with AlphaCode. CoRR abs/2203.07814 (2022).
[19] Shuai Lu, Nan Duan, Hojae Han, Daya Guo, Seung-won Hwang, and Alexey Svy-
atkovskiy. 2022. ReACC: A Retrieval-Augmented Code Completion Framework.
In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), ACL 2022, Dublin, Ireland, May 22-27, 2022.
Association for Computational Linguistics, 6227–6240.
[20] Colin McDonald and David Chiang. 2021. Syntax-Based Attention Masking
for Neural Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Student
Research Workshop, NAACL-HLT 2021, Online, June 6-11, 2021. Association for
Computational Linguistics, 47–52.
[21] Grégoire Mialon, Roberto Dessì, Maria Lomeli, Christoforos Nalmpantis,
Ramakanth Pasunuru, Roberta Raileanu, Baptiste Rozière, Timo Schick, Jane
Dwivedi-Yu, Asli Celikyilmaz, Edouard Grave, Yann LeCun, and Thomas Scialom.
2023. Augmented Language Models: a Survey.CoRR abs/2302.07842 (2023).
[22] Sarah Nadi, Stefan Krüger, Mira Mezini, and Eric Bodden. 2016. Jumping through
hoops: why do Java developers struggle with cryptography APIs?. InProceedings
of the 38th International Conference on Software Engineering, ICSE 2016, Austin,
TX, USA, May 14-22, 2016. ACM, 935–946.
[23] Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a
Method for Automatic Evaluation of Machine Translation. InProceedings of the
40th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, July 6-12,
2002, Philadelphia, PA, USA. ACL, 311–318.
[24] Hammond Pearce, Baleegh Ahmad, Benjamin Tan, Brendan Dolan-Gavitt, and
Ramesh Karri. 2022. Asleep at the Keyboard? Assessing the Security of GitHub
Copilot’s Code Contributions. In43rd IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy,
SP 2022, San Francisco, CA, USA, May 22-26, 2022. IEEE, 754–768.
[25] Neil Perry, Megha Srivastava, Deepak Kumar, and Dan Boneh. 2023. Do Users
Write More Insecure Code with AI Assistants?. In Proceedings of the 2023
ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, CCS 2023,
Copenhagen, Denmark, November 26-30, 2023. ACM, 2785–2799.
[26] Gabriel Poesia, Alex Polozov, Vu Le, Ashish Tiwari, Gustavo Soares, Christopher
Meek, and Sumit Gulwani. 2022. Synchromesh: Reliable Code Generation from
Pre-trained Language Models. InThe Tenth International Conference on Learning
Representations, ICLR 2022, Virtual Event, April 25-29, 2022. OpenReview.net.
[27] Sazzadur Rahaman, Ya Xiao, Sharmin Afrose, Fahad Shaon, Ke Tian, Miles Frantz,
Murat Kantarcioglu, and Danfeng (Daphne) Yao. 2019. CryptoGuard: High Preci-
sion Detection of Cryptographic Vulnerabilities in Massive-sized Java Projects. In
Proceedings of the 2019 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications
Security, CCS 2019, London, UK, November 11-15, 2019. ACM, 2455–2472.
[28] Shuo Ren, Daya Guo, Shuai Lu, Long Zhou, Shujie Liu, Duyu Tang, Neel
Sundaresan, Ming Zhou, Ambrosio Blanco, and Shuai Ma. 2020. CodeBLEU: a
Method for Automatic Evaluation of Code Synthesis.CoRR abs/2009.10297 (2020).
[29] Simone Scalabrino, Mario Linares-Vásquez, Rocco Oliveto, and Denys Poshy-
vanyk. 2018. A comprehensive model for code readability.J. Softw. Evol. Process.
30, 6 (2018).
[30] John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov.
2017. Proximal Policy Optimization Algorithms. CoRR abs/1707.06347 (2017).
[31] Vighnesh Leonardo Shiv and Chris Quirk. 2019. Novel positional encodings to
enable tree-based transformers. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 32: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2019,
NeurIPS 2019, December 8-14, 2019, Vancouver, BC, Canada. 12058–12068.
[32] Catherine Tony, Markus Mutas, Nicolás E. Díaz Ferreyra, and Riccardo Scandari-
ato. 2023. LLMSecEval: A Dataset of Natural Language Prompts for Security
Evaluations. In 20th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Mining Software
Repositories, MSR 2023, Melbourne, Australia, May 15-16, 2023. IEEE, 588–592.
[33] Petar Velickovic, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova, Adriana Romero, Pietro
Liò, and Yoshua Bengio. 2018. Graph Attention Networks. In 6th International
Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2018, Vancouver, BC, Canada, April
30 - May 3, 2018, Conference Track Proceedings. OpenReview.net.
[34] Yao Wan, Wei Zhao, Hongyu Zhang, Yulei Sui, Guandong Xu, and Hai Jin. 2022.
What Do They Capture? - A Structural Analysis of Pre-Trained Language Models
for Source Code. In 44th IEEE/ACM 44th International Conference on Software
Engineering, ICSE 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, May 25-27, 2022. ACM, 2377–2388.
[35] Brandon T. Willard and Rémi Louf. 2023. Efficient Guided Generation for Large
Language Models. CoRR abs/2307.09702 (2023).
[36] Laurie A. Williams and Robert R. Kessler. 2003. Pair Programming Illuminated.
Addison Wesley.
[37] Seongjun Yun, Minbyul Jeong, Raehyun Kim, Jaewoo Kang, and Hyunwoo J. Kim.
2019. Graph Transformer Networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 32: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2019,
NeurIPS 2019, December 8-14, 2019, Vancouver, BC, Canada. 11960–11970.
[38] Shengyu Zhang, Linfeng Dong, Xiaoya Li, Sen Zhang, Xiaofei Sun, Shuhe Wang,
Jiwei Li, Runyi Hu, Tianwei Zhang, Fei Wu, and Guoyin Wang. 2023. Instruction
Tuning for Large Language Models: A Survey.CoRR abs/2308.10792 (2023).
[39] Jie Zhou, Ganqu Cui, Shengding Hu, Zhengyan Zhang, Cheng Yang, Zhiyuan Liu,
Lifeng Wang, Changcheng Li, and Maosong Sun. 2020. Graph neural networks:
A review of methods and applications.AI Open 1 (2020), 57–81.
116