--- PDF PAGE 1 ---
Trust Calibration in IDEs: Paving the Way for
Widespread Adoption of AI Refactoring
Markus Borg
CodeScene and Lund University
Malm¨o, Sweden
markus.borg@codescene.com
Abstract—In the software industry, the drive to add new
features often overshadows the need to improve existing code.
Large Language Models (LLMs) offer a new approach to im-
proving codebases at an unprecedented scale through AI-assisted
refactoring. However, LLMs come with inherent risks such as
braking changes and the introduction of security vulnerabilities.
We advocate for encapsulating the interaction with the models
in IDEs and validating refactoring attempts using trustworthy
safeguards. However, equally important for the uptake of AI
refactoring is research on trust development. In this position
paper, we position our future work based on established models
from research on human factors in automation. We outline action
research within CodeScene on development of 1) novel LLM
safeguards and 2) user interaction that conveys an appropriate
level of trust. The industry collaboration enables large-scale
repository analysis and A/B testing to continuously guide the
design of our research interventions.
Index Terms —software maintainability, AI refactoring, large
language models, trust
I. I NTRODUCTION
Large Language Models (LLMs) have quickly become an
integral part of Software Engineering (SE) practice. JetBrain’s
annual developer survey 2023 revealed that already a year
ago, 77% of developers use ChatGPT and 46% use GitHub
Copilot [1]. While AI promises a coding revolution with tools
to expedite code writing, we posit that the core challenge lies
elsewhere. Developers spend most of their time understanding
and maintaining existing code [2]. While high-quality code
is known to improve productivity [3], reduce defect counts
and vulnerabilities [4], and increase developer satisfaction [5],
organizations routinely prioritize implementing new features
over improving existing code [6]. Our premise is that there
is substantial potential in applying LLMs to improve the
maintainability of existing code – we call this AI refactoring.
Despite the potential of LLMs, they come with inherent
risks. Research shows that LLMs’ prompt-based generation
of non-deterministic code poses several dangers [7], [8].
Within the context of AI refactoring, these risks manifest as
potential security vulnerabilities and unexpected changes in
functional behavior. Our own investigation into four function-
level JavaScript code smells exposed that the raw output from
state-of-the-art LLMs provides correct refactorings in only
37% of cases [9], a finding corroborated in recent work by
Pomian et al. [10]. Furthermore, we have observed several
instances where subtle defects were introduced. We advocate
turning the large numbers of blunt refactoring recommenda-
tions into a reduced set of sharp edits, effectively prioritizing
precision over recall in line with recommendations from
Google Research [11].
To address the unreliable nature of raw LLM output, we
advocate for encapsulating the interaction with the models
in IDEs. We discourage developers from refactoring code by
copying solutions from LLM interactions in web browsers.
Instead, AI refactoring should seamlessly integrate into IDEs
– as pioneered by GitHub Copilot – and come equipped with
safeguards to validate their output. We draw inspiration from
our previous work on using safety cages to enable the safe
use of deep learning in automotive systems [12]. In context of
AI refactoring, we argue that research on effective safeguards
is a necessary step toward more capable AI refactoring that
transcends the function level.
AI refactoring within IDEs presents an ideal point for
targeted research interventions. The IDE can act as the first
gatekeeper for LLM output before it gets committed to the
codebase. Additionally, studying IDE-level interventions al-
lows for fine-grained data collection, guiding UI design for
an optimal developer experience – crucial for acceptance and
realizing our vision of widespread adoption of AI refactoring.
However, we posit that trustworthiness is only one side of
the coin. Equally important for the uptake of AI refactoring
is user trust. Analogous to previous paradigm shifts, e.g.,
mechanization and electrification, AI uptake requires users to
trust the technology. In the AI refactoring context, developers
must develop trust in the technology to accept increasing
automation levels. Developers are a diverse population, and
the trust development journey can vary widely across individ-
uals, influenced by their experiences, preferences, and work
contexts.
We argue that the IDE is the best arena to foster developer
trust. As the developers’ primary workspace, it provides a
familiar and effective starting point. However, building trust
is a complex process, and research is needed to enable trust
calibration within the IDE – achieving the right balance
between trust and trustworthiness. An imbalance can result
in either reckless reliance on AI refactoring or unnecessary
delays in adopting a highly valuable tool. Addressing this
challenge demands interdisciplinary research that bridges hu-
man factors in automation, human-machine interaction, and
computer science.
arXiv:2412.15948v1  [cs.SE]  20 Dec 2024

--- PDF PAGE 2 ---
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
presents related work on LLM-based software maintenance
and recommendation delivery. Next, we present how we build
on the theoretical background related to trust and its develop-
ment in Sec. III and IV, respectively. Finally, Sec. V presents
a short conclusion and outlines our next steps.
II. R ELATED WORK
This section presents an overview of research on LLM-
based software maintenance and recommendation delivery
in IDEs. Amid an avalanche of academic papers on LLM
and SE, two sets of researchers have undertaken ambitious
literature reviews to assess the current landscape. Hou et al.
identified 229 papers in a systematic literature review [13]
and Fan et al. found 244 related preprints on arXiv [14].
Both papers list primary studies that use LLMs for various
SE tasks, including code generation, testing, maintenance,
and documentation. Within maintenance, Automatic Program
Repair (APR) emerges as the most common application, while
refactoring has received less attention.
We investigated the subset of refactoring and APR papers to
explore 1) how proposed patches were validated for correct-
ness and 2) which datasets were studied. Our findings reveal
that most papers rely on successful compilation and passing
unit tests for validation, despite research highlighting con-
cerns regarding the effectiveness of test suites [15]. In terms
of static code analysis, we found examples of vulnerability
analysis [16], abstract syntax tree checks [17], and similarity
measurements [18]. Finally, most papers target small Java and
Python datasets, i.e., there is a need for larger studies.
In the context of refactoring assistance, there has been a no-
table evolution from recommendation systems (RecSys) [19],
[20] to software bots [21]. While both approaches offer
developers guidance, bots typically provide higher levels of
automation [22], often encompassing task execution, and fre-
quently engage in dynamic two-way interactions. Regardless
of the approach, an effective UI is essential for conveying
recommendations and rationales. Google’s latest work on their
internal reviewing assistant stresses how they successfully bal-
anced moderate LLM results with a carefully crafted UI [11].
A critical UI consideration is the delivery of patch proposals
to developers. UI design remains a very active topic in the
general RecSys community, with calls for more practitioner-
led research to investigate underlying questions such as how
“various implementations affect design qualities such as trust,
fun, transparency, serendipity, sense of control” [23]. In the
RecSys SE literature, fundamental guidelines include de-
signing for understandability, transparency, and assessability
before considering trust cultivation [24]. With the increasing
focus on bots, interaction has taken the front seat. Non-
intrusiveness was a topic already for RecSys, but this turns
even more important in the bot setting [25]. In the same vein,
it is important not to overload the developers with noise [26].
To conclude, while existing guidelines for designing APR bots
will support our work on AI refactoring [23], the literature
clearly motivates further research on UI design for developer
acceptance and trust [27].
III. T RUST IN THE CONTEXT OF AI R EFACTORING
Various research fields have studied the socio-psychological
concept of trust, and many researchers have tried explain-
ing the multi-faceted concept. A systematic review by Hoff
and Bashir reports that most explanations contain three con-
stituents [28]. First, there must be a truster to give trust (e.g.,
AI assistant), a trustee to accept the trust (e.g., a developer),
and something must be at stake (e.g., code integrity). Second,
the trustee must have an incentive to perform some task (e.g.,
code smell removal). Third, there must be arisk that the trustee
will fail to perform the task, leading to potential consequences
(e.g., breaking the build).
Trust is related to reliance, explained by Baier as “continued
relationship on the basis of dependable habits” [29]. In terms
of our vision for widespread adoption of AI refactoring,
the development community needs a continuous working
relationship with AI assistants (the trusters) based on the
dependable habits toward the developers, testers, and other
roles (the trustees). A well-cited review article by Lee and See
presents substantial evidence that trust guides reliance [30],
i.e., trust is a meaningful construct for us to study and support.
Furthermore, the two authors propose the definition of trust
that steers our work: “the attitude that an agent will help
achieve an individual’s goals in a situation characterized by
uncertainty and vulnerability.”
Unfortunately, misalignment between human trust and the
trustworthiness of automation is common. Fig. 1 depicts the
phenomenon, based on seminal work by Parasuraman and
Riley [31]. The terms misuse and disuse explain failures from
flawed partnerships between humans and automation. Misuse
refers to the failures that occur when users overtrust automa-
tion, i.e., trust > trustworthiness. Disuse denotes failures that
occur when people distrust the capabilities of automation, i.e.,
trust < trustworthiness. The diagonal line represents appropri-
ate trust, a balanced state between trust and trustworthiness,
i.e., trust = trustworthiness.
Fig. 1 also presents two essential concepts related to obtain-
ing appropriate trust. Calibration (blue arrows) is efforts taken
to remedy misalignment between trust and trustworthiness.
Resolution represents how “precisely a judgment of trust
differentiates levels of automation” [31]. The gray area shows
an example of poor resolution, as different levels of trustwor-
thiness map to the same trust. In the AI refactoring context,
this pertains to differently capable AI assistants being entrusted
equally by developers. The poor resolution effectively turns
trust into a nonlinear function of trustworthiness. On top of
this, human psychology also contributes to non-linearities [32].
Examples include the lasting effect of the initial experience
and that an AI assistant’s worst behaviors disproportionally
impact trust – implications that can persist across several
subsequent releases, even with improvements.
Fig. 2 displays the trust development of a developer that
initially distrusts AI assistants. The y-axis indicates three
critical breakpoints: I) Interest: recognizing a potential option,

--- PDF PAGE 3 ---
Fig. 1: Balancing trust and trustworthiness for AI refactoring.
Fig. 2: Trust development for a skeptical user of AI refactoring.
II) Try: the willingness to experiment with the tool, and
III) Rely: readiness for habitual use. First, the developer’s
trust development is gradual until reaching I). Trust devel-
opment is initially gradual until reaching I), after which it
accelerates, particularly at II), before eventually reaching III).
Striped intervals underscore significant individual variations.
The black arrow shows our aim to expedite trust calibration
from skepticism to appropriate trust among developers, which
will be guided by Hoff and Bashir’s conceptual model for
dynamic trust development (described in Sec. IV).
Parasuraman and Riley also define specificity to denote
the degree of trust associated with a particular component
or aspect of the automation. Specificity is highly relevant
to AI refactoring, as the effectiveness of solutions can vary
across different code smells. To maximize their usefulness,
developers may need support in understanding the specific
contexts in which AI assistants excel, rather than treating their
performance as uniform. How to best tackle this challenge is
another topic for future research.
IV. T RUST DEVELOPMENT IN THE IDE
Several researchers have developed models to describe the
development of trust in automation. Since trust is a multi-
faceted concept, trust development inevitably follows suit.
Lee and See discuss how trust evolves as users process
information about the capabilities of automation [30], i.e., its
trustworthiness. The authors describe how three different types
of information processing are involved. Most effective is the
affective process, i.e., “emotional responses to violations and
confirmations of implicit expectancies.” The remaining two
ways are the analytical process (rational evaluation) and the
analogical process (comparing to opinions of others, including
the online developer community [33]). Previous work clearly
shows that users must both think and feel to develop trust in
automation, but feelings dominate – trust is emotional.
We embark from the body of knowledge on trust devel-
opment. Primarily, our starting point is a conceptual model
of factors that influence trust and reliance in automation
developed by Hoff and Bashir [28]. This model, in turn, builds
on three different components of trust identified by Marsh
and Dibben [34]. Dispositional trust represents an individual’s
enduring tendency to trust automation. This level of trust
tends to be stable over time, primarily influenced by culture,
age, gender, and personality traits. Situational trust reflects
how the trust development depends on the situation, i.e.,
external variability (e.g., type of system, complexity, and task
difficulty) and internal variability (e.g., self-confidence and
mood). Learned trust is split into 1) Initial Learned trust based
on pre-existing knowledge before interaction (e.g., experience
with similar systems, reputation of the brand, and technology
insights) and 2) Dynamic Learned trust that evolves during
interaction with the system.
Fig. 3 shows a simplified version of Hoff and Bashir’s
model [28]. Dashed arrows indicate factors that can change
during a single interactive session. The model is primarily
organized into factors prior to interaction (the left side) and
during interaction (the gray area). A) depicts the three com-
ponents of trust that develop prior to system interaction, i.e.,
Dispositional, Situational, and Initial Learned trust. Situational
factors that are not directly related to trust can influence
both B) the Initial Reliance Strategy prior to interaction
and C) Reliance on the AI Assistant during interaction. The
Initial Reliance Strategy influences how users interact with
the AI Assistant, subsequently D) influencing Refactoring
Performance. In the same vein, the user’s Reliance on the
AI Assistant during interaction E) influences the Refactoring
Performance. Users continuously process information related
to the Refactoring Performance, which F) affects the Dynamic
Learned trust, subsequently G) influencing the Reliance on the
AI Assistant. E-F-G constitute a closed loop, illustrating how
the user’s trust develops as they observe the performance of
the automation [32].
To conclude the section on trust, we paraphrase Lee and
See [30]: “appropriate trust and reliance depend on how well
the AI refactoring trustworthiness is conveyed to the potential
users in the development community.” To support conveyance,
Lee and See argue that technology providers should either 1)
make the automation simpler or 2) reveal their operation more
clearly. As simpler solutions cannot replace the LLMs used in

--- PDF PAGE 4 ---
Fig. 3: Factors that affect trust in AI refactoring.
AI refactoring – opaque AI technology is essential – there
is no alternative to developing trustworthy AI. Researchers
must find the appropriate level of detail to explain how AI
refactoring work, and customize it based on personal user
preferences that dynamically change over time.
V. C ONCLUSIONS AND THE ROAD AHEAD
Our vision is improved software maintainability thanks to
widespread adoption of highly capable AI refactoring. Meeting
the vision revolves around scientific foundation around two
complementary perspectives of trust. First, trustworthy AI
refactoring focuses on enhancing the safeguards to increase
the refactoring confidence by rejecting low-confidence code
editing. Second, trusted AI refactoring involves developing the
UI to foster developers’ trust by customizing the delivery of
LLM-based recommendations in the IDE. Previous research on
human factors suggests that misalignment between trust and
trustworthiness can severely impede industry adoption [31] –
we aspire to calibrate these two sides of trust.
Our research will progress through action research, i.e., “a
disciplined process of inquiry conducted by and for those tak-
ing the action” [35]. Action research is an appropriate method
when the main objective is to facilitate change, e.g., improved
AI refactoring, and the researcher is an integral part of
the change process [36]. Implementing research interventions
within CodeScene’s mature SE intelligence platform offers
an opportunity for large-scale evaluations with real users in
proprietary projects. Leveraging CodeScene’s IDE extensions
for VS Code and IntelliJ, we aim to conduct detailed telemetry
for A/B testing, enabling continuous enhancement of both the
trustworthy safeguards and the trust-cultivating UI, i.e., a user-
centered development of our research interventions.
Regarding safeguards, integrating state-of-the-art program
analysis [37], [38] and vulnerability analysis [39] are crucial
first steps. Furthermore, a range of potential complementary
techniques, such as anomaly detection [40] and mutation
analysis [15], will be explored and prioritized as part of our
future work. We conclude this position paper with two pivotal
research questions that will guide our continued research:
RQ1 How can we design effective safeguards to enhance the
trustworthiness of AI refactoring?
RQ2 In what ways can the UI for AI refactoring be crafted to
facilitate trust calibration?
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Our thanks go to Christofer Englund and Emma S ¨oderberg
for reviewing earlier versions of this work.
REFERENCES
[1] JetBrains, “The State of Developer Ecosystem 2023,” JetBrains s.r.o.,
Tech. Rep., 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.jetbrains.com/lp/
devecosystem-2023/
[2] R. Minelli, A. Mocci, and M. Lanza, “I Know What You Did Last
Summer - An Investigation of How Developers Spend Their Time,” in
Proc. of the 23rd International Conference on Program Comprehension,
2015, pp. 25–35.
[3] A. Tornhill and M. Borg, “Code Red: The Business Impact of Code
Quality - A Quantitative Study of 39 Proprietary Production Codebases,”
in Proc. of the 5th International Conference on Technical Debt , 2022,
pp. 11–20.
[4] A. Al-Boghdady, K. Wassif, and M. El-Ramly, “The Presence, Trends,
and Causes of Security Vulnerabilities in Operating Systems of IoT’s
Low-End Devices,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 7, p. 2329, 2021.
[5] D. Graziotin, F. Fagerholm, X. Wang, and P. Abrahamsson, “On the
Unhappiness of Software Developers,” in Proc. of the 21st International
Conference on Evaluation and Assessment in Software Engineering ,
2017, pp. 324–333.
[6] Z. Li, P. Avgeriou, and P. Liang, “A Systematic Mapping Study on
Technical Debt and Its Management,” Journal of Systems and Software ,
vol. 101, pp. 193–220, 2015.
[7] B. Yetistiren, I. Ozsoy, and E. Tuzun, “Assessing the Quality of GitHub
Copilot’s Code Generation,” in Proc. of the 18th International Confer-
ence on Predictive Models and Data Analytics in Software Engineering ,
2022, pp. 62–71.

--- PDF PAGE 5 ---
[8] O. Asare, M. Nagappan, and N. Asokan, “Is GitHub’s Copilot as Bad
as Humans at Introducing Vulnerabilities in Code?” Empirical Software
Engineering, vol. 28, no. 6, p. 129, 2023.
[9] A. Tornhill, M. Borg, and E. Mones, “Refactoring vs Refuctoring:
Advancing the State of AI-automated Code Improvements,” CodeScene,
Tech. Rep., 2024. [Online]. Available: https://tinyurl.com/refuctoring
[10] D. Pomian, A. Bellur, M. Dilhara, Z. Kurbatova, E. Bogomolov,
T. Bryksin, and D. Dig, “Next-Generation Refactoring: Combining LLM
Insights and IDE Capabilities for Extract Method,” in Proc. of the 40th
International Conference on Software Maintenance and Evolution, 2024.
[11] A. Froemmgen, J. Austin, P. Choy, N. Ghelani, L. Kharatyan, G. Surita,
E. Khrapko, P. Lamblin, P.-A. Manzagol, M. Revaj, M. Tabachnyk,
D. Tarlow, K. Villela, D. Zheng, S. Chandra, and P. Maniatis, “Re-
solving Code Review Comments with Machine Learning,” in Proc. of
the 46th International Conference on Software Engineering: Software
Engineering in Practice , 2024, pp. 204–215.
[12] M. Borg, J. Henriksson, K. Socha, O. Lennartsson, E. Sonnsjo Lone-
gren, T. Bui, P. Tomaszewski, S. R. Sathyamoorthy, S. Brink, and
M. Helali Moghadam, “Ergo, SMIRK is Safe: A Safety Case for a
Machine Learning Component in a Pedestrian Automatic Emergency
Brake System,” Software Quality Journal , vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 335–403,
2023.
[13] X. Hou, Y . Zhao, Y . Liu, Z. Yang, K. Wang, L. Li, X. Luo, D. Lo,
J. Grundy, and H. Wang, “Large Language Models for Software En-
gineering: A Systematic Literature Review,” ACM Trans. Softw. Eng.
Methodol., Sep. 2024.
[14] A. Fan, B. Gokkaya, M. Harman, M. Lyubarskiy, S. Sengupta, S. Yoo,
and J. M. Zhang, “Large Language Models for Software Engineering:
Survey and Open Problems,” in Proc. of the International Conference
on Software Engineering: Future of Software Engineering , 2023, pp.
31–53.
[15] S. Vercammen, S. Demeyer, M. Borg, N. Pettersson, and G. Hedin,
“Mutation Testing Optimisations Using the Clang Front-end,” Software
Testing, Verification and Reliability, vol. 34, no. 1, p. e1865, 2024.
[16] H. Pearce, B. Tan, B. Ahmad, R. Karri, and B. Dolan-Gavitt, “Examining
Zero-Shot Vulnerability Repair with Large Language Models,” in Proc.
of the Symposium on Security and Privacy , 2023, pp. 2339–2356.
[17] M. Tufano, C. Watson, G. Bavota, M. D. Penta, M. White, and
D. Poshyvanyk, “An Empirical Study on Learning Bug-Fixing Patches
in the Wild via Neural Machine Translation,” ACM Trans. Softw. Eng.
Methodol., vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 19:1–19:29, 2019.
[18] S. Fakhoury, S. Chakraborty, M. Musuvathi, and S. K. Lahiri, “Towards
Generating Functionally Correct Code Edits from Natural Language
Issue Descriptions,” 2023. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2304.
03816
[19] G. Bavota, A. De Lucia, A. Marcus, and R. Oliveto, “Recommending
Refactoring Operations in Large Software Systems,” inRecommendation
Systems in Software Engineering , M. P. Robillard, W. Maalej, R. J.
Walker, and T. Zimmermann, Eds. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, 2014,
pp. 387–419.
[20] M. Wyrich and J. Bogner, “Towards an Autonomous Bot for Automatic
Source Code Refactoring,” in Proc. of the 1st International Workshop
on Bots in Software Engineering , May 2019, pp. 24–28.
[21] S. Santhanam, T. Hecking, A. Schreiber, and S. Wagner, “Bots in
Software Engineering: A Systematic Mapping Study,” PeerJ Computer
Science, vol. 8, p. e866, 2022.
[22] R. Parasuraman, T. Sheridan, and C. Wickens, “A Model For Types
and Levels of Human Interaction with Automation,” Transactions on
Systems, Man and Cybernetics , vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 286–297, 2000.
[23] A. Smits and K. van Turnhout, “Towards a Practice-Led Research
Agenda for User Interface Design of Recommender Systems,” inProc. of
the IFIP Conference on Human-Computer Interaction, J. Abdelnour No-
cera, M. Kristin Larusdottir, H. Petrie, A. Piccinno, and M. Winckler,
Eds. Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland, 2023, pp. 170–190.
[24] E. Murphy-Hill and G. Murphy, “Recommendation Delivery,” in Recom-
mendation Systems in Software Engineering , M. Robillard, W. Maalej,
R. Walker, and T. Zimmermann, Eds. Springer, 2014, pp. 223–242.
[25] C. Brown and C. Parnin, “Sorry to Bother You: Designing Bots for
Effective Recommendations,” in Proc. of the 1st International Workshop
on Bots in Software Engineering , 2019, pp. 54–58.
[26] M. Wessel, I. Wiese, I. Steinmacher, and M. A. Gerosa, “Don’t Disturb
Me: Challenges of Interacting with Software Bots on Open Source
Software Projects,” Proc. of the ACM on Hum.-Comput. Interact., vol. 5,
no. CSCW2, pp. 301:1–301:21, 2021.
[27] M. Wyrich, R. Hebig, S. Wagner, and R. Scandariato, “Perception and
Acceptance of an Autonomous Refactoring Bot,” vol. 1, Feb. 2020, pp.
303–310.
[28] K. A. Hoff and M. Bashir, “Trust in Automation: Integrating Empirical
Evidence on Factors That Influence Trust,” Human Factors , vol. 57,
no. 3, pp. 407–434, 2015.
[29] A. Baier, “Trust and Antitrust,” Ethics, vol. 96, no. 2, pp. 231–260,
1986.
[30] J. D. Lee and K. A. See, “Trust in Automation: Designing for Appro-
priate Reliance,” Human Factors, vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 50–80, Mar. 2004.
[31] R. Parasuraman and V . Riley, “Humans and Automation: Use, Misuse,
Disuse, Abuse,” Human Factors, vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 230–253, 1997.
[32] B. Muir and N. Moray, “Trust in Automation. Part II. Experimental Stud-
ies of Trust and Human Intervention in a Process Control Simulation,”
Ergonomics, vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 429–460, 1996.
[33] R. Cheng, R. Wang, T. Zimmermann, and D. Ford, ““It would work for
me too”: How Online Communities Shape Software Developers’ Trust
in AI-Powered Code Generation Tools,” ACM Trans. Interact. Intell.
Syst., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 11:1–11:39, 2024.
[34] S. Marsh and M. R. Dibben, “The Role of Trust in Information Science
and Technology,”Annual Review of Information Science and Technology,
vol. 37, pp. 465–98, 2003.
[35] M. Staron, Action Research in Software Engineering: Theory and
Applications. Springer International Publishing, 2020.
[36] C. Wohlin and P. Runeson, “Guiding the Selection of Research Method-
ology in Industry–Academia Collaboration in Software Engineering,”
Information and Software Technology , vol. 140, p. 106678, 2021.
[37] E. S ¨oderberg, T. Ekman, G. Hedin, and E. Magnusson, “Extensible
Intraprocedural Flow Analysis at the Abstract Syntax Tree Level,”
Science of Computer Programming , vol. 78, no. 10, pp. 1809–1827,
2013.
[38] A. Dura, C. Reichenbach, and E. S ¨oderberg, “JavaDL: Automatically
Incrementalizing Java Bug Pattern Detection,” Replication Package for
Article: ’JavaDL: Automatically Incrementalizing Java Bug Pattern
Detection’, vol. 5, no. OOPSLA, pp. 165:1–165:31, 2021.
[39] M. Shen, A. Pillai, B. A. Yuan, J. C. Davis, and A. Machiry,
“An Empirical Study on the Use of Static Analysis Tools in
Open Source Embedded Software,” 2023. [Online]. Available: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/2310.00205
[40] J. Henriksson, C. Berger, M. Borg, L. Tornberg, S. R. Sathyamoorthy,
and C. Englund, “Performance Analysis of Out-of-Distribution Detection
on Trained Neural Networks,” Information and Software Technology ,
vol. 130, p. 106409, 2021.