--- PDF PAGE 1 ---
Nature Machine Intelligence | Volume 7 | February 2025 | 221–231
 221
nature machine intelligence
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-024-00976-7
Article
What large language models know and what 
people think they know
Mark Steyvers    1 , Heliodoro Tejeda1, Aakriti Kumar1, Catarina Belem2, 
Sheer Karny1, Xinyue Hu1, Lukas W. Mayer1 & Padhraic Smyth2
As artificial intelligence systems, particularly large language models 
(LLMs), become increasingly integrated into decision-making processes, 
the ability to trust their outputs is crucial. T o earn human trust, LLMs must 
be well calibrated such that they can accurately assess and communicate 
the likelihood of their predictions being correct. Whereas recent work 
has focused on LLMs’ internal confidence, less is understood about 
how effectively they convey uncertainty to users. Here we explore the 
calibration gap, which refers to the difference between human confidence 
in LLM-generated answers and the models’ actual confidence, and the 
discrimination gap, which reflects how well humans and models can 
distinguish between correct and incorrect answers. Our experiments 
with multiple-choice and short-answer questions reveal that users tend 
to overestimate the accuracy of LLM responses when provided with 
default explanations. Moreover, longer explanations increased user 
confidence, even when the extra length did not improve answer accuracy. 
By adjusting LLM explanations to better reflect the models’ internal 
confidence, both the calibration gap and the discrimination gap narrowed, 
significantly improving user perception of LLM accuracy. These findings 
underscore the importance of accurate uncertainty communication 
and highlight the effect of explanation length in influencing user trust in 
artificial-intelligence-assisted decision-making environments.
Uncertainty communication plays a critical role in decision-making 
and policy development. Uncertainties are often expressed verbally to 
help stakeholders understand risks and make informed choices across 
a wide range of domains, including climate policy, law, medicine and 
intelligence forecasting. Psychology research has investigated percep-
tions of verbally expressed uncertainty (for example, phrases such as 
‘very unlikely’ or ‘almost certain’) in these domains1– 5. Despite their 
lack of precision in communicating probabilities, verbal probability 
phrases provide a simple and effective way to communicate uncer-
tainty in natural language contexts. The emergence of large language 
models (LLMs) introduces new complexities in the area of uncertainty 
communication. These models are increasingly integrated into areas 
such as public health6, coding7 and education8. However, the question 
of how effectively LLMs communicate uncertainty is unexplored. As 
the primary mode of communication with LLMs is through natural 
language, it is critical to understand whether LLMs are able to accu-
rately convey through verbal means what they know or do not know.
Recent research raises doubts about the reliability of the infor -
mation that LLMs generate. One notable issue is the possibility of 
generating responses that, while convincing, may be inaccurate or 
nonsensical9,10. The unreliability of LLMs has led developers of LLMs to 
caution against the uncritical acceptance of model outputs11, suggest-
ing that it is not always clear when the models are or are not confident 
in the knowledge communicated to the user.
Received: 2 May 2024
Accepted: 13 December 2024
Published online: 21 January 2025
 Check for updates
1Department of Cognitive Sciences, University of California, Irvine, CA, USA. 2Department of Computer Science, University of California, Irvine, CA, USA. 
 e-mail: mark.steyvers@uci.edu

--- PDF PAGE 2 ---
Nature Machine Intelligence | Volume 7 | February 2025 | 221–231 222
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-024-00976-7
of this confidence. In addition, we investigate the discrimination gap, 
which relates to the difference in the ability to discriminate between 
probably correct and incorrect answers. Any discrimination gap shows 
that whatever internal LLM representation is used to tell the differ -
ence between probably correct and incorrect answers is not conveyed 
effectively to humans. We address two specific research questions in 
this context. First, how large are the calibration and discrimination 
gaps? That is, is there a notable gap between LLM model confidence 
and human confidence in terms of how each assesses the true accuracy 
of the LLM? Second, can the calibration and discrimination gaps be 
reduced? Can the quality of human confidence in an LLM be improved 
by adapting the textual output of the LLM to internal model confi -
dence? These questions have important implications for the design of 
reliable LLM assistants. By aligning the LLM’s internal confidence with 
human perception of this confidence, we can bridge the gap between 
what LLMs know and what people think they know, which is crucial for 
the development of effective and trustworthy assistants
Our contributions in this context are twofold. First, we present a 
set of experimental studies and a dataset that directly captures human 
assessment of LLM confidence in a question-answering context, provid-
ing insight into human perceptions of LLM textual responses. Second, 
we test and suggest ways of generating LLM responses that improve the 
calibration quality of human confidence relative to the LLM assistant’s 
model confidence and the LLM’s true accuracy.
LLMs
We use three publicly available LLMs in our studies: GPT-3.5 (ref. 20), 
PaLM2 (ref. 21) and GPT-4o. We apply the GPT-3.5 and PaLM2 models 
to a subset of multiple-choice questions from the Massive Multitask 
At the same time, recent research has also indicated that LLMs 
have the ability, to a certain degree, to accurately discern their own 
knowledge boundaries. LLMs in particular can exhibit a reasonable level 
of calibration for multiple-choice questions such that the probability 
the model assigns to a selected answer tracks with the probability that 
this answer is correct12– 14. In addition, recent studies show that LLMs 
can distinguish between answerable and unanswerable questions13,15 
and the internal state of an LLM can distinguish between truthful state-
ments and lies16 and truthful statements and confabulations17. These 
findings suggest that LLMs may possess an internal mechanism that is 
reflective of self-knowledge.
In the specific context of question-answering, an LLM’s model 
confidence is typically equated to the probability assigned by the LLM 
to the selected answer relative to other possible answers (for example, 
refs. 18,19). However, from the perspective of a human interacting 
with the LLM, this internal model confidence is not usually displayed 
to human users as part of LLM output. Instead, in current practice, 
humans rely solely on the language produced by the LLM to assess 
LLM confidence. T o contrast with model confidence, in this article 
we use the term human confidence to refer to a human’s assessment 
(expressed as a probability) of how likely it is that the LLM’s answer is 
correct based only on the language produced by the LLM without any 
knowledge of the LLM’s internal model confidence.
Surprisingly, studies focused on investigating human confidence 
in LLM outputs are lacking. In this article, we take a step in addressing 
this issue and investigate what we term the calibration gap, namely 
the difference in the reliability of LLM model confidence and human 
confidence. In effect, the calibration gap represents the gap between an 
LLM’s own internal confidence of what it knows and human perception 
Q uest i o n:  T he signif i cance o f  
Frere's discovery  w a s t hat  w hat  he 
f ound w as locat ed:
Choose f r om t he f ollow i n g  opt ions:
A. beneath the remai n s of (...)
B. on the surface, above the (...)
C . i n  a  r egi on o f  A f r i c a  w her e  (...)
D. on t op o f  t he r u i n s  o f  (...)
Pl ease answ er thi s  questi on.
A n s w er A , B, C , o r  D. T h e  a n s w er
i s :
Mode l c onf i den c e
T he a ns w er is  [C] because Frere's
discovery  o f s t one t ools in t he
Somme Valley  o f  France w as
signif i cant  because i t w as in a
region of Africa (...) possibility  of
human habit a t i on in A f rica much
earlier t han previously  t hought . 
A
B
C
D
0. 13
0. 01
0. 40
0. 46
95%
What  i s  t he p r obability
t hat t he  LLM a ns w er i s
correct? 
LLM
Mode l  e xp l anati o n
Multiple- c h o i c e  ques tio n Hu m an c onfidenc e
Short -ans we r quest ion Model 
confidence I am not  ent irely  sure t hat  t he
answ e r is dove,  as sy mbols of
happiness can vary  across
cult ures.  While doves are o ften
associat ed w i t h  peace and love,
w hich can cont ribut e  t o  f eelings
o f  happiness,  t here  a re  o t her
birds like robins or canaries t hat
might  also be seen as s y mbols
o f  joy  in diﬀ erent  t r adit i ons.  … 
T RUE
FALSE
0. 18
0. 82
75%
What  i s  t he p r obability
that the LLM answ er i s
correct? 
Q uest i o n:  Which bird is the
int ernat ional s y mbol f or happiness ? 
Do v e
Model 
answer
Q uest i o n:  Which bird is the
int ernat ional s y mbol f or happiness ? 
Proposed answ e r:  Do v e
Is  t he  pr oposed a ns w er:
A ) t r ue or B) fal s e.
T he answ e r is:  
Mode l  e xp l anati o n
Fig. 1 | Overview of the evaluation methodology for assessing the calibration 
gap between model confidence and human confidence in the model. The 
multiple-choice questions, the approach works as follows: (1) prompt the LLM 
with a question to obtain the model’s internal confidence for each answer choice; 
(2) select the most likely answer and prompt the model a second time to generate 
an explanation for the given answer; (3) obtain the human confidence by showing 
users the question and the LLM's explanation and asking users to indicate the 
probability that the model is correct. In this toy example, the model confidence for 
the multiple-choice question is 0.46 for answer C, whereas the human confidence 
is 0.95. For short-answer questions, the approach is similar except that internal 
model confidence is obtained by an additional step where the LLM is prompted to 
evaluate whether the previously provided answer to the question is true or false
13. 
In the short-answer question example, the LLM model explanation was modified 
with uncertainty language to convey the low model confidence (0.18). For the two 
toy examples, the correct answers are ‘ A’ and ‘blue bird’ .

--- PDF PAGE 3 ---
Nature Machine Intelligence | Volume 7 | February 2025 | 221–231
 223
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-024-00976-7
Language Understanding (MMLU) dataset, a comprehensive dataset that 
contains multiple-choice questions from various knowledge domains, 
such as science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM), 
humanities, social sciences and more19. We apply the GPT-4o model 
to a subset of short-answer questions from the Trivia QA dataset22. For 
each multiple-choice and short-answer question, we assess the model 
confidence by computing the token likelihoods (see the Methods for 
details). This method for reading out model confidence allows a direct 
computation of the relative probabilities of different possible answers 
in multiple-choice questions12,13,18,19,23 and the probability that the answer 
to an open-ended question is correct13,17. We investigate the relationship 
between model confidence and accuracy to determine whether the LLM 
is reasonably well calibrated, independent of the LLM’s ability to elicit 
well-calibrated confidence from humans who use the LLM.
Behavioural experiments
We designed behavioural experiments to evaluate human perceptions of 
LLM confidence. In these experiments, participants estimate the prob-
ability that the LLM’s answer to a multiple-choice or short-answer ques-
tion is correct based on the explanation that the LLM provided (Fig. 1). 
Participants are not provided any direct access to the LLM’s numerical 
model confidence, allowing us to make inferences about participants’ 
perceptions of the confidence of the LLM based on model explana-
tions alone. In addition, for the multiple-choice questions part of the 
experiment only, with the assistance of the LLM, participants provided 
answers to the questions. Previous research has demonstrated that the 
MMLU multiple-choice questions are difficult for participants who lack 
domain expertise, resulting in near-chance accuracy19. We anticipate that 
these questions will be difficult to answer without the assistance of the 
LLM because the majority of the participants in our experiments lack 
domain expertise, and their perception of the explanation’s content will 
influence their evaluation more than their own knowledge.
We conducted two experiments each involving the three types of 
LLMs and two types of questions (see Table 1 for an overview). Experi-
ment 1 assesses human perceptions of LLM accuracy using the LLM’s 
default explanations for either multiple-choice or short-answer ques-
tions. The results from this experiment allow us to address the first 
research question regarding the size of the calibration and discrimina-
tion gap between model and human confidence. Experiment 2 manipu-
lates the prompts to produce three levels of uncertainty language (low, 
medium and high confidence) and three levels of explanation length, 
resulting in nine different types of explanations presented to partici-
pants. The prompts are designed to include uncertainty language cor-
responding to model confidence at the start of the explanation. Table 2 
illustrates explanations from a particular multiple-choice question 
used in the experiments (see Supplementary Table 2 for the full model 
explanations). The results from this experiment serve two purposes. 
First, we establish that human confidence varies with the uncertainty 
language and the length of the explanation. Next, we use the results 
from experiment 2 to answer the second research question, which is to 
understand how the calibration and discrimination gap can be reduced 
by aligning the uncertainty language with model confidence—showing 
a low-, medium- and high-confidence explanation when the model has 
low, medium and high confidence, respectively. The Supplementary 
Information (‘experiment 3’) reports the results from an additional 
experiment with a different prompting approach that alters the default 
explanations from experiment 1. We use the two metrics to assess the 
relationship between human and model confidence and model accu-
racy. See Methods for details.
Table 1 | Overview of experiments
Experiment Question type LLM Explanation type Number of 
participants
1a Multiple choice GPT-3.5 Default explanations 41
1b Multiple choice PaLM2 Default explanations 39
1c Short answer GPT-4o Default explanations 42
2a Multiple choice GPT-3.5 Modified explanations 60
2b Multiple choice PaLM2 Modified explanations 60
2c Short answer GPT-4o Modified explanations 59
Table 2 | Example explanations for the answer by GPT-3.5 to 
a multiple-choice question used in experiments 1a and 2a
Prompt style Explanation
Experiment 1a
Baseline The answer is [A] Velocity. This is because in an 
inelastic collision, the two objects involved will stick 
together and move with a common velocity after the 
collision. […] In this case, the initial momentum of 
the 1.5-kg cart is transferred to the combined mass of 
the two carts after the collision, resulting in the same 
velocity for both carts. Therefore, the correct answer is 
[A] Velocity.
Experiment 2a
Low confidence 
and long
I am not completely sure that the answer is [A] 
because velocity is a vector quantity that includes 
both magnitude and direction. In this scenario, the 
carts may have the same magnitude of velocity, but 
they may not necessarily have the same direction. 
Therefore, I am not completely convinced that the 
answer is [A]. […] In this case, the carts would indeed 
have the same velocity as each other.
Medium confidence 
and long
I am somewhat sure that the answer is [A] because 
velocity is a vector quantity that takes into account 
both the speed and direction of an object’s motion. In 
this scenario, the two carts are colliding and sticking 
together, […] Therefore, I am somewhat sure that the 
answer is [A] because the velocity of the two carts will 
be the same after the collision due to the conservation 
of momentum principle.
High confidence 
and long
I am sure that the answer is [A] because velocity is a 
vector quantity that describes the speed and direction 
of an object’s motion. In this scenario, the two carts are 
colliding and sticking together, meaning they will have 
the same final velocity after the collision. […] This is 
also supported by the fact that the carts have different 
masses, so their kinetic energies and linear momenta 
will not be the same. Thus, the correct answer is [A] 
velocity.
Low confidence 
and short
I am not sure that the answer is [A] because the carts 
may have different velocities before and after the 
collision due to the conservation of momentum.
Medium confidence 
and short
I am somewhat sure that the answer is [A] because 
velocity is a vector quantity that takes into account 
both the speed and direction of an object’s motion. 
In this scenario, the carts will have the same velocity 
after the collision because they are stuck together and 
moving in the same direction.
High confidence 
and short
I am sure that the answer is [A] because velocity is a 
vector quantity that is conserved in collisions, meaning 
that the final velocity of the two carts will be the same.
Low confidence 
and uncertainty 
only
I am not sure that the answer is [A].
Medium confidence 
and uncertainty 
only
I am somewhat sure that the answer is [A].
High confidence 
and uncertainty 
only
I am sure that the answer is [A].
The particular question is: “A moving 1.5 kg cart collides with and sticks to a 0.5 kg cart which 
was initially at rest. Immediately after the collision, the carts each have the same ______ as 
each other. Choose from the following options: A) Velocity B) Kinetic energy C) Mass D) Linear 
momentum.” The correct answer to this question is A.

--- PDF PAGE 4 ---
Nature Machine Intelligence | Volume 7 | February 2025 | 221–231 224
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-024-00976-7
Results
We start by examining the results from experiment 1 and compare 
human and model confidence in the case where LLMs generate default 
explanations for participants. We present the results for two different 
metrics: (1) expected calibration error (ECE), which assesses the degree 
to which confidence scores from the model or the human reflect the 
true accuracy of the LLM, and (2) area under the curve (AUC), which 
assesses the degree to which confidence scores discriminate between 
correct and incorrect responses (see the Methods for details). The find-
ings indicate that there is a significant gap, as measured by calibration 
and discrimination, between what LLMs know and what humans believe 
they know based on default explanations.
Calibration gap
Figure 2 (left) shows the ECE for both model and human confidence. The 
results show a calibration gap; across the different types of LLMs and 
types of questions (multiple choice and short answer), the ECE metric 
is much lower for model confidence (in grey) than for human confi-
dence with baseline explanations (in green). This gap demonstrates that 
standard explanations provided by the LLM do not enable participants 
to judge the likelihood of correctness of the LLM’s answers, leading to 
a misalignment between perceived accuracy and actual LLM accuracy.
Figure 3 expands on the calibration results in Fig. 2 to show detailed 
calibration results for each LLM and each experimental condition. The 
diagrams show how well model confidence (left column) and human 
confidence (right two columns) are calibrated. The ideal calibration (that 
is, ECE of 0) would yield results along the diagonal. For multiple-choice 
questions, both LLMs have a tendency to be overconfident, resulting in 
calibration lines below the diagonal. For the short-answer questions, the 
LLM is somewhat underconfident. Comparing the LLM with the human 
calibration in experiment 1 (middle column), the results show that, for 
the multiple-choice questions, human miscalibration is primarily due 
to overconfidence, indicating that people generally believe that LLMs 
are more accurate than they actually are. The histograms (inset panels) 
demonstrate that a substantial portion of the calibration error is due 
to participants’ propensity to produce high-confidence scores, even 
though the model accuracy for the associated questions is much lower 
than expected based on confidence.
Discrimination gap
Participants are not very good, relative to the LLM, at discriminating 
between which answers are probably correct or incorrect based on the 
default explanation. We assess discrimination using the AUC metric 
applied to the human confidence ratings. Figure 2 (right) shows the 
AUC for both model and human confidence. The results show a gap 
between how well model and human confidence discriminate between 
correct and incorrect answers. The LLM model confidence discrimi-
nates between correct and incorrect answers well above chance (GPT-
3.5 AUC 0.751 and PaLM2 AUC 0.746 for the multiple-choice questions 
and GPT-4o AUC 0.781 for the short-answer questions). By contrast, 
participants who view the default explanations in experiment 1 were 
only slightly better than random guessing (AUC 0.589 and AUC 0.602 
for the multiple-choice explanations by GPT-3.5 and PaLM2, respec-
tively, and AUC 0.592 for the short-answer explanations by GPT-4o). 
Therefore, default explanations lead to a discrimination gap as well.
Explanation style and length affect human confidence
Experiment 2 evaluates how human confidence is affected by the degree 
of uncertainty expressed in LLM explanations (across three levels of 
confidence) as well as the overall length of the LLM explanation (across 
three levels of length).
Figure 4 shows that the type of uncertainty language used in the 
explanations has a strong influence on human confidence regardless 
of the type of LLM that produced the explanation or the type of ques-
tion. Low-confidence explanations (‘I am not sure’) produced signifi-
cantly lower human confidence than medium-confidence explanations  
(‘I am somewhat sure’); Bayes factor (BF) >100 across experiments 
2a, 2b and 2c. Similarly, medium-confidence explanations produced 
lower human confidence than high-confidence explanations; BF >100 
across experiments 2a, 2b and 2c. The Supplementary Information 
(‘human confidence agreement’) shows an analysis of the reliability 
of the confidence ratings across participants.
In addition, the length of the explanations also affected the human 
confidence in the LLM answers. Long explanations led to significantly 
higher confidence than the short explanations (BF of 25 with data com-
bined across experiments 2a, 2b and 2c), and short explanations led 
to significantly higher confidence than the responses that contained 
only the uncertainty expression (BF >100 with data combined across 
experiments 2a, 2b and 2c). The additional information presented in 
longer explanations did not enable participants to better discriminate 
between probably correct and incorrect answers for longer explana-
tions. Across experiments 2a, 2b and 2c, the mean participant AUC is 
0.54 and 0.57 for long and uncertainty-only explanations, respectively 
(BF of 0.23). Therefore, the length of the answer led to an increase in 
Calibration error Discrimination
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
E C E AUC
B as eline e x planat ions
Model confidence
Human confidence
Modif ied ex planat ions
GPT­3.5
multiple choice
PaLM2
multiple choice
GPT­4o
short answer
(n = 60)
(n = 60)
(n = 59)
(n = 41)
(n = 39)
(n = 42)
Fig. 2 | Calibration error and discrimination for model confidence and human 
confidence across the behavioural experiments and LLMs. Calibration error is 
assessed by ECE (lower is better), while discrimination is assessed by AUC (higher 
is better). The vertical dashed lines represent the calibration and discrimination 
gap between model confidence and human confidence for unmodified 
explanations (experiments 1a, 1b and 1c). For human confidence, the data points 
represent the AUC values computed separately for each participant (n shown 
in figure) and the error bars represent the 95% confidence interval of the mean 
across participants. Because of data sparsity, the ECE values were computed at 
the group level.

--- PDF PAGE 5 ---
Nature Machine Intelligence | Volume 7 | February 2025 | 221–231
 225
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-024-00976-7
human confidence without any corresponding change in sensitivity to 
discriminating between correct and incorrect answers.
The results confirm that people can appropriately interpret verbal 
cues about uncertainty and that manipulating the length of the expla-
nation can directly impact human confidence.
Reducing the calibration and discrimination gap
Having established in experiment 2 that the uncertainty language in 
the LLM explanation can modify human confidence, we now evaluate 
whether linking the type of uncertainty language to the LLM model 
confidence (that is, showing a low-, medium- and high-confidence 
explanation when the model confidence is low, medium and high, 
respectively) can reduce the calibration and discrimination gap.
Selecting explanations on the basis of model confidence. We simu-
lated the effect of aligning the explanation style to model confidence by 
a simple decision rule. With this rule, we select the type of explanation 
s ∈ {low confidence, medium confidence, high confidence} on the basis 
of the LLM model confidence score p
s =
⎧⎪
⎨⎪
⎩
low confidence if p ≤ θ1
medium confidence if θ1 < p ≤ θ2
high confidence if θ2 < p
. (1)
The parameters θ1 and θ 2 determine the ranges where low-, medium- and 
high-confidence explanations are chosen. The application of this rule 
to a given parameter setting leads to a participant’s estimates being 
filtered out if the explanation style used for a specific question does 
not match the selected style. This allowed us to simulate the effect of 
participants receiving different types of explanations based on model 
confidence (that is, lower-confidence explanations for low model confi-
dence and higher-confidence explanations for high model confidence). 
The Supplementary Information (‘optimization procedure’) provides 
details on the optimization procedure and also a demonstration that 
the results are not particularly sensitive to the parameter settings.
Calibration and discrimination results. Figure 2 shows the calibration 
and discrimination results when the selection rule is applied to the 
results from experiment 2. The results in Fig. 2 (left, red bars) show that 
the calibration gap has narrowed substantially. While there is still gener-
ally a higher calibration error for human confidence relative to model 
confidence, the calibration gap has decreased for all three LLMs relative 
to the baseline explanations in experiment 1. Furthermore, Fig. 2 (right) 
shows that the discrimination gap (as measured by AUC) has also been 
narrowed relative to the baseline explanations across LLMs and ques-
tion types (BF >100, BF 6.48 and BF >100 for experiments 2a, 2b and 
2c, respectively). Therefore, the results show that selecting the type 
of explanation on the basis of LLM model confidence improves both 
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
E CE 0. 10 4
E CE 0. 29 1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
E CE 0. 15 4
 E CE 0. 22 5
E CE 0. 264 E CE 0. 150
GPT-3.5
multiple-choice
questions 
PaLM2
multiple-choice
questions
Human calibration
Model calibration Default explanations Modifi ed  explan ations
Model a cc urac y Model a cc urac y Model a cc urac y
GPT-4o
short-answer
questions
0 0.5
Model confidence Human confidence Human confidence
1.0 0 0.5 1.0 0 0.5 1.0
E CE 0. 165E CE 0. 141 E CE 0. 111
Fig. 3 | Calibration diagrams for model confidence and human confidence 
across experiments 1 and 2. The top and middle rows show results for multiple-
choice questions with the GPT-3.5 and PaLM2 models, respectively. The bottom 
row shows results for short-answer questions with the GPT-4o model. The 
histograms at the bottom of each plot show the proportion of observations in 
each confidence bin (values are scaled by 30% for visual clarity). The shaded 
regions represent the 95% confidence interval of the mean computed across 
participants and questions.

--- PDF PAGE 6 ---
Nature Machine Intelligence | Volume 7 | February 2025 | 221–231 226
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-024-00976-7
calibration and discrimination performance, as human confidence in 
the LLM becomes more closely aligned with the LLM’s actual accuracy.
Participants lack specialized knowledge
For the experiments with multiple-choice questions (1a, 1b, 2a and 
2b), participants provided their own answer after seeing the answer 
from the LLM. This allowed us to analyse whether participants have any 
independent knowledge from the LLM that allowed them to improve 
on LLM accuracy. In experiments 1a and 2a with GPT-3.5, participants’ 
average answer accuracy was 51%, closely aligning with LLM’s 52% accu-
racy rate. Similarly, for the multiple-choice experiments 1b and 2b 
with PaLM2, average participant accuracy was 45%, similar to the 47% 
accuracy rate for the LLM. In the majority (82%) of responses across all 
multiple-choice experiments, participants selected the response that 
agreed with the LLM’s explanation.
When participants chose to alter the answer, the average accuracy 
was 33% which is lower than the LLM’s accuracy of 39% for these particu-
lar questions. These findings suggest limited success in participants’ 
ability to accurately answer the questions independent of the LLM’s 
explanation. This is consistent with findings from ref. 19, showing that 
Mechanical Turk workers without specialized knowledge (akin to our 
participant pool) scored 35% accuracy on similar questions.
When we applied the selection rule and the explanation type was 
aligned with model confidence, human decision accuracy in experi -
ments 2a and 2b did not improve for the selected questions (even 
though discrimination and calibration improved). This shows that accu-
rate uncertainty communication by the LLM allowed participants to 
recognize when the LLM was providing a probably correct or incorrect 
answer, but the lack of accurate human knowledge independent from 
the LLM prevented participants from improving on the LLM answer.
At the end of the experiment, participants estimated the perfor-
mance they would achieve on similar questions for each of the ten topics 
in the sample of MMLU questions. The median of these self-assessed 
expertise estimates did not substantially vary between topics: from 
30% (for example, high school physics) to 45% (for example, high 
school world history). Examining the impact of perceived expertise 
on accuracy estimation, we divided participants into two groups based 
on whether their self-rated expertise was above or below 50% sepa -
rately for each of the ten topics. For the experiments with GPT-3.5, the 
higher-expertise groups generally had better discrimination (AUC 
0.600 versus AUC 0.579), but there was no evidence that this difference 
was significant (BF <1). In addition, the calibration error was comparable 
between the two groups (ECE 0.289 versus 0.292). Similarly, no effect of 
expertise was found for the experiments with PaLM2. Therefore, partici-
pants who considered themselves more knowledgeable about a topic 
were not more adept at estimating the LLM’s performance in that area.
Discussion
Our research focused on bridging the gap between what an LLM knows 
and what users perceive it knows. This gap is critical, especially as reli-
ance on LLMs for decision-making across various domains is rapidly 
increasing.
Research on LLMs has begun to address these challenges, with 
a focus on improving uncertainty communication and the quality 
of explanations. Several studies have explored LLM confidence in 
answering multiple-choice questions, focusing on how well the models’ 
self-reported confidence aligns with their actual accuracy12,13,19,24 and 
whether users can accurately assess the reliability of the explanations 
provided25. The work by ref. 26 investigates how users respond to verbal 
phrases of uncertainty in a simulated trivia task but does not use actual 
LLM outputs. Overall, there has been little research examining user 
confidence in LLM output. Our work uses actual LLM outputs and its 
confidence in an attempt to quantify the calibration and discrimination 
gap. As a result, we directly address the issue of miscommunication of 
uncertainty from LLMs to humans.
Our results showed that users consistently overestimated how 
accurate LLM outputs were, especially when they relied on the models’ 
default explanations. This was true for three different LLMs and two 
different types of questions (multiple choice and short answer). This 
tendency towards overconfidence in LLM capabilities is an impor -
tant concern, particularly in scenarios where critical decisions rely 
on LLM-generated information. The inability of users to discern the 
reliability of LLM responses not only undermines the utility of these 
models but also poses risks in situations where user understanding of 
model accuracy is critical.
In addition, the results also showed a length bias where longer 
explanations led to higher human confidence levels even though they 
did not contain any additional information to help users to better 
discriminate between probably correct and incorrect answers. This 
suggests that users were processing the explanations at a shallow 
level, relying on simple textual cues such as overall length to predict 
LLM accuracy. This result is consistent with studies in social psychol-
ogy and communication research that suggest that longer answers or 
explanations may be perceived as more persuasive or credible, even 
when they do not contain more meaningful information27,28. This length 
bias has also been found in domains such as peer reviews, where longer 
Experiment 2c
short- answ er questions
GPT-4o
Experiment 2a
multiple- choice questions
GPT-3.5
Experiment 2b
multiple- choice questions
PaLM2
E x planation s t yl e
0
0. 1
0. 2
0. 3
0. 4
0. 5
0. 6
0. 7
0. 8
0. 9
1.0
E x planation s t yl e
0
0. 1
0. 2
0. 3
0. 4
0. 5
0. 6
0. 7
0. 8
0. 9
1.0
Hu m an c onfidence
E x pla n a tion l e ngt h
Lon g
Shor t
Un certainty  o n l y
Not sure Somewhat sure SureNot sure Somewhat sure SureNot sure Somewhat sure Sure
E x planation s t yl e
0
0. 1
0. 2
0. 3
0. 4
0. 5
0. 6
0. 7
0. 8
0. 9
1.0
Fig. 4 | Mean human confidence across LLM explanation styles varying 
in uncertainty language and length. Data are presented as mean values of 
participant confidence in experiments 2a (n = 60), 2b (n = 60) and 2c (n = 59). For 
reference, the dashed lines show the average human confidence for the baseline 
explanations in experiments 1a, 1b, and 1c. The error bars represent the 95% 
confidence interval of the mean across participants.

--- PDF PAGE 7 ---
Nature Machine Intelligence | Volume 7 | February 2025 | 221–231
 227
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-024-00976-7
reviews are perceived as more persuasive and informative even if the 
information content remains the same29.
Although default LLM explanations do not enable users to perceive 
what the models truly know, this research shows that a simple approach 
based on tailored explanations can bridge this perception gap. This was 
achieved by altering the prompts used to generate explanations based 
on model confidence, allowing better control over how uncertainty was 
expressed in the responses. Specifically, we designed these prompts 
to induce varying degrees of certainty in the explanations, ranging 
from expressions of low confidence (for example, ‘I am not sure the 
answer is [B] because’) to high confidence (for example, ‘I am confident 
the answer is [B] because’). By modifying the language of the LLM’s 
responses to better reflect model confidence, users showed improved 
calibration in their assessment of the LLM’s reliability and were bet -
ter able to discriminate between correct and incorrect answers. This 
improvement underscores the importance of transparent communica-
tion from LLMs, suggesting a need for researchers to investigate how 
model explanations affect user perception.
One limitation of the current study is the focus on a specific type of 
question involving a small number of response alternatives (multiple 
choice) and short answers to open-ended questions. The extent to which 
these results apply to longer open-ended questions remains an open 
question. Further research could investigate the applicability of our find-
ings across a broader range of scenarios. Another limitation of this study 
is that our approach to modifying the prompt on the basis of internal 
uncertainty required the LLM to be prompted twice: once to read out 
the answer and model confidence, and again to produce an explanation 
modified by the model confidence. Future research could investigate 
how to produce confidence-modified explanations in a single step.
Another important area for future research is to understand the 
fundamental causes of the miscommunication of uncertainty. Why 
do LLMs generate calibrated model confidences while also produc -
ing explanations that are not consistent with those confidences? One 
hypothesis is that current LLMs are aligned to human preferences 
using reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF)30, which 
produces some built-in biases. In these RLHF procedures, various 
types of explanations are presented to human participants, who can 
then choose their preferred explanations. LLMs are then fine-tuned 
on the basis of human preference data, making them more likely to 
produce explanations that people prefer. While RLHF encourages 
human-aligned output, it inevitably reproduces any human prefer -
ence biases. For example, people prefer detailed and generally longer 
explanations31,32. As a result, LLMs trained on these human preferences 
may produce explanations that are overly convincing, potentially 
misleading users about the reliability of the information.
An alternative hypothesis to the production of overconfident 
explanations lies in the autoregressive nature of well-established 
LLMs. In particular, we conjecture that, after committing to an answer 
(encoded as a sequence of tokens), the model will generate a sequence 
of tokens (explanation) that maximizes the likelihood of the previous 
answer, effectively resulting in an assertive answer. A similar hypothesis 
was also presented in ref. 16. Interestingly, the possibility that the LLM’s 
choice of a particular answer inflates the rationale for that answer resem-
bles the phenomenon of choice-supportive biases in psychology 33.  
After making a decision, people tend to overestimate the desirability 
of the chosen option while underestimating the desirability of rejected 
alternatives. This can make them feel more confident in their decision 
than they were when they first made it.
Our work shares some parallels with prior studies on the human 
perception and evaluation of artificial intelligence (AI)-generated 
explanations in the domain of machine learning classifiers (see ref. 34 
for an overview). These studies frequently use feature highlighting to 
explain what areas of the image35 or what fragments of documents36 
can support the suggested classification. Studies have found mixed 
evidence for the effectiveness of these types of AI explanations in human 
decision-making37– 40. These results highlight the challenge of ensuring 
that AI-generated explanations align with human expectations and 
allow humans to distinguish between correct and incorrect answers.
In conclusion, our research highlights the critical role of clear and 
accurate communication in the interaction between users and LLMs. 
Enhancing the alignment between model confidence and the user’s 
perception of model confidence can lead to more responsible and 
trustworthy use of LLMs, particularly in areas where the accuracy of 
AI-generated information is critical.
Methods
Question datasets
MMLU dataset for multiple-choice questions.  The MMLU dataset 
is a comprehensive multitask dataset that contains multiple-choice 
questions from various knowledge domains, such as STEM, humanities, 
social sciences and more19. In total, there are 14,042 test set questions 
from 57 categories curated by undergraduate and graduate students 
from freely available online resources such as the Graduate Record 
Examinations and United States Medical Licensing Examination. These 
questions range in difficulty from high school to the professional level. 
The MMLU dataset is widely used to measure a text model’s multitask 
accuracy, as it challenges models on their real-world text understand-
ing beyond mere linguistic comprehension, thus making it a robust 
benchmark for model evaluation19,41,42. For this research, we sampled 
a subset of 350 questions from a range of model confidence levels in 
ten select categories from the full dataset to comprehensively evaluate 
people’s assessment of LLM model confidence.
Trivia QA dataset for short-answer questions. Trivia QA is a dataset 
of trivia questions that can be answered in short answers22. Similar to 
methodology by ref. 17, contextual information was excluded to make 
the question answering more challenging for LLMs and more suitable 
for our behavioural experiments. For this research, we assessed model 
confidence for 5,000 questions from the original 650,000-question 
dataset before selecting a final sample of 336 questions from a range of 
model confidence levels. The final set of questions was categorized into 
seven different topics (culture and society, entertainment, geography, 
history, politics, science and technology, and sports).
Assessing model confidence and creating question subsets
Several approaches have been developed to elicit confidence in LLMs 
and to assess the degree to which the elicited confidence scores are 
calibrated (see ref. 43  for an overview). In this research, we use an 
approach commonly used to access internal model information 
based on token likelihoods, allowing the direct computation of rela -
tive probabilities of different possible answers in multiple-choice 
questions12,13,18,19,23. In addition, the token-likelihood approach can be 
extended to short-answer questions such that the token-likelihood 
reflects the model confidence that the LLM answer is correct13.
Methods that do not require access to internal model representa-
tions have used prompting strategies designed to elicit verbal expres-
sions of uncertainty24,44. Confidence is expressed in natural language 
as numeric strings (for example, ‘80%’)24,45 or more qualitative expres-
sions of confidence (for example, ‘I am not confident the answer is X’).  
Prompts can be designed to emphasize step-by-step reasoning about 
the correctness of individual steps and clarify the space of possible 
answers to lead to better calibration than simple prompts that sim -
ply ask for a confidence rating 24. For short-form question answer -
ing, prompting strategies can lead to calibrated confidence levels 46. 
However, prompting approaches have been found to be less accurate 
compared with methods that read out model confidence
24.
Multiple-choice questions.  For the multiple-choice questions, we 
followed the procedures based on reading out the internal token likeli-
hoods as described in the GPT-4 T echnical Report12. We used a zero-shot 

--- PDF PAGE 8 ---
Nature Machine Intelligence | Volume 7 | February 2025 | 221–231 228
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-024-00976-7
prompting approach, in which the model was prompted only with the 
target question and its associated answer options (Extended Data 
Fig. 1). We first assessed the LLM model confidence of GPT-3.5 and 
PaLM2 language models to 14,042 MMLU multiple-choice questions. 
This allowed us to then select questions with (somewhat) evenly dis-
tributed confidence levels. We read out the log-probabilities for the 
top five tokens completed by the model using the APIs for the GPT3.5 
(gpt-3.5-turbo-instruct) and the PaLM2 (text-bison@002) models. 
The temperature parameter was set to 0. The answer was considered 
complete if the tokens included the single letters A, B, C and D. The log 
scores were then converted and normalized to probabilities across the 
four answer options (so that the sum of the scores equalled one). In this 
research, internal uncertainties, referred to in this Article as model 
confidence, were represented by these probabilities in all experiments, 
a common technique in calibration assessment with LLMs12,13,18,19,23.
Based on the model confidence levels of each LLM for all MMLU 
questions, we created a subset separately for each LLM. In total, 35 ques-
tions were sampled for each of 10 topics, for a total of 350 questions. 
For each topic, the 35 questions were sampled to approximately create 
a uniform distribution over model confidence using the confidence 
bins 0.2–0.4, 0.4–0.6, 0.6–0.8 and 0.8–1.0. However, owing to the 
small number of questions that lead to model confidence in the lowest 
confidence bin, fewer questions were sampled for the 0.2–0.4 confi-
dence range. Supplementary Fig. 1 shows the distribution over model 
confidence levels for the entire MMLU dataset as well as the question 
subset sampled for our study. Model accuracy across the 350 questions 
is 55% and 50% for GPT-3.5 and PaLM2, respectively.
Short-answer questions. For the short-answer questions, we used a 
procedure based on the pTrue method13 to assess internal model con-
fidence. All experiments with short-answer questions were performed 
with the API for the GPT-4o model (gpt-4o-mini) with the tempera -
ture parameter set to 0.7 (similar to refs. 13 ,17). The model was first 
prompted to generate the answer to each of the 5,000 trivia questions 
in the sample. T o ensure that the model response was restricted to 
short answers, we used a ten-shot prompting approach where the 
prompt contained the target question preceded by a random sample 
of ten trivia question with the reference answers. The median answer 
length was two words.
T o assess the model confidence for short-answer questions, as 
shown in Fig. 1 (bottom), we prompted the model with the question and 
the proposed answer and asked it to determine whether the proposed 
answer is true or false (see Extended Data Fig. 1 for an example of the 
exact prompt). The log scores for the true and false answer options were 
then converted and normalized to probabilities across the two answer 
options. The model confidence in our experiments corresponds to the 
probability for the true answer option.
For the behavioural experiments, we created a subset of 336 ques-
tions to ensure a uniform distribution across four confidence bins: 
0–0.25, 0.25–0.50, 0.50–0.75 and 0.75–1.0. Supplementary Figs. 1 
and 2 show the distribution of model confidence levels for the 5,000 
sample and the 336 subset used in our behavioural experiments. The 
model accuracy across the 336 questions is 63%.
We used both automatic and human scoring methods to assess 
model accuracy. For the 5,000-question sample, we prompted an LLM 
(GPT-4o) to determine whether the reference answer from the Trivia 
QA had the same meaning as the LLM answer within the context of the 
question. For the 336-question sample, we also applied human scoring. 
For 97% of questions, automatic and human scoring agreed. The model 
accuracy for the 336-question subset was based on human evaluation.
Behavioural experiments
This section describes the methodology we used for our behavioural 
experiments. Experiment 1 presented default explanations from LLMs 
to participants, whereas experiment 2 presented explanations that 
were altered by different types of uncertainty language and overall 
length (see Table 1 for an overview of all experiments). Within each 
experiment, across different groups of participants, we varied the 
type of question as well as the type of LLM. Experiments 1a and 2a used 
explanations from GPT-3.5 for the MMLU multiple-choice questions. 
Experiments 1b and 2b used explanations from PaLM2 for the MMLU 
multiple questions. Finally, experiments 1c and 2c used explanations 
from GPT-4o for the Trivia QA short-answer questions. The Supple -
mentary Information (‘experiment 3’) describes the results from an 
additional experiment 3, which was conducted to verify that our results 
generalize to different ways to vary the type of uncertainty language 
in the explanations.
Participants. A total of 301 participants completed the study across 
experiments 1 and 2 (Table 1 presents the breakdown by experiment). 
The participants were native English speakers residing in the USA, 
recruited through Prolific ( www.prolific.com). Demographic data 
were obtained for 284 participants. There were 146 female and 138 male 
participants. The median age was 34 years (age range from 18 to 79). 
Supplementary Table 1 presents the breakdown of demographic infor-
mation by experiment. The University of California, Irvine institutional 
review board approved the experimental protocol. The participants 
who completed experiments 1a, 1b, 2a or 2b were paid US$8 for their 
participation. The participants in experiments 1c and 2c required less 
time to complete the study and were paid US$5. The payments across 
experiments corresponded to a rate of approximately US$12 per hour. 
Before participating, all individuals provided informed consent and 
received detailed instructions outlining the experimental procedure 
as well as how to understand and interact with the user interface. Par-
ticipants were also asked to sign an integrity pledge after reading all of 
the instructions, stating that they would complete the experiment to 
the best of their abilities. After submitting their integrity pledge, the 
participants were granted access to the experiment.
Experimental procedure. Across all experiments, participants were 
randomly assigned 40 questions (from the pool of 350 multiple-choice 
questions or the pool of 336 short-answer questions). The questions 
were sampled to balance across model confidence bins ensuring that 
all participants were exposed to questions at all levels of difficulty.
Furthermore, in experiments 2a, 2b and 2c, we balanced the types 
of explanation style across questions so that each question was pre -
sented approximately the same number of times with each style. It 
should be noted that, for each subject, each question was presented 
only once, and each question received only one explanation style. 
The counterbalancing ensured that the same question had (roughly) 
an equal number of observations for each explanation style (across 
participants).
For the multiple-choice questions, the participant’s task was 
divided into two phases for each question (Extended Data Fig. 2). In 
the first stage, the participants had to provide a probability estimate 
that the LLM’s answer was correct. In the second phase, the partici -
pants had to answer the question with the assistance of the LLM. The 
participants were instructed to use their own knowledge as well as the 
LLM’s response when making their own answer selection for this phase. 
For the short-answer questions, the participants only had to provide 
a probability estimate that the LLM’s answer was correct. They were 
instructed not to look up the answer. For the short-answer questions, 
the question-answering phase was omitted to prevent participants 
from looking up the answers.
At the end of the experiments, we administered a brief survey in 
which the participants self-assessed their knowledge of topics associ-
ated with the multiple-choice and short-answer questions. The partici-
pants were asked to estimate the expected accuracy for each topic if 
they were presented with questions similar to those they encountered 
during the experiment.

--- PDF PAGE 9 ---
Nature Machine Intelligence | Volume 7 | February 2025 | 221–231
 229
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-024-00976-7
Creating explanation styles with varying degrees of uncertainty. This 
section describes how we constructed prompts to elicit explanations with 
varying levels of uncertainty language in the experiments. Table 2 con-
tains examples of explanations from the two experiments and styles. For 
additional details on the exact prompts used, see Supplementary Table 3.
Experiment 1. T o generate the baseline explanations for experiment 1, 
we used a simple prompt that asked for an explanation, which would 
also repeat the answer.
Experiment 2. In experiment 2, explanations were manipulated in terms 
of the level of confidence expressed in the answer as well as the length of 
the answer. In total, the experiment included nine types of explanations 
(three levels of uncertainty × three levels of length). The three levels of 
confidence (low, medium and high) were generated by prompts that 
instructed the LLM to ‘mention you are not sure/somewhat sure/sure’ in 
the explanations, respectively. The prompts elicited responses in which 
the beginning of each explanation indicated the level of uncertainty (for 
example, ‘I am not sure the answer is [B] because’ for the low-confidence 
prompt). Note that expressions of uncertainty were not limited to the 
start of the explanation. Answers often contained additional explana-
tions for why the LLM lacked confidence (for example, ‘further research 
may be required to confirm this’ and ‘it is not possible to definitively 
state that… ’). Experiment 2 also varied the length of the explanation 
across three levels: long, short and uncertainty only. The long explana-
tions were generated by not including any instruction regarding the 
length of the answer. The short explanations were generated by adding 
an instruction to use as few words as possible in the explanation. The 
uncertainty-only explanations were generated by removing the ration-
ale for the answer and including only the expression of uncertainty and 
the answer (for example, ‘I am not sure the answer is [B]’).
For experiment 2, the median lengths of the long and short expla-
nations were as follows: 115 and 34 words (GPT-3.5, multiple choice), 64 
and 24 words (PaLM2, multiple choice) and 95 and 24 words (GPT-4o, 
short answer). By comparison, the uncertainty-only responses con -
tained a median of nine words across all variants of experiment.
Metrics
T o investigate the relationship between the accuracy of answers to 
the multiple-choice and short-answer questions and the confidence 
(either human confidence or model confidence) associated with them, 
we utilize a range of metrics to evaluate this association. The primary 
focus is on understanding how well confidence levels correlate with the 
correctness of answers. T o achieve this, we use both ECE and the AUC 
metric. These metrics assess the extent of overconfidence in predic-
tions as well as the diagnostic effectiveness of confidence scores in 
distinguishing between correct and incorrect answers 13,18,23,24,46. The 
use of AUC in this context parallels various metrics in psychology 
for metacognitive discrimination or sensitivity, which similarly aim 
to evaluate the effectiveness of confidence scores in distinguishing 
between correct and incorrect answers 47. In addition, in the Supple -
mentary Information (‘Overconfidence Error’), we also show results 
for the additional metric of Overconfidence Error (OE).
ECE. We evaluate miscalibration using the ECE, as detailed in refs. 48,49. 
The ECE is calculated by averaging the absolute differences between 
accuracy and confidence across M equal-width probability bins
ECE =
M
∑
m=1
|Bm|
N |conf(Bm)−acc(B m)|, (2)
where N represents the total sample count, B m represents the m th 
confidence bin, and acc(B m) and conf(B m) respectively denote the 
accuracy and average confidence for samples in the mth bin. ECE does 
not account for the direction of deviations between the accuracy and 
the confidence per bin, respectively, so a non-zero ECE can indicate a 
mix of over- and underconfidence. Although recent work50,51 has shown 
that ECE can underestimate the true calibration error, the potential for 
underestimation should not be an issue given that we are interested 
in analysing differences in ECE rather than unbiased estimates of the 
error itself.
AUC. The AUC metric is used to assess the diagnostic ability of con -
fidence scores in distinguishing between correct and incorrect 
answers. Utilizing the Mann–Whitney U  statistic approach, the AUC 
represents the probability that a randomly chosen correct answer 
has a higher-confidence score compared with a randomly chosen 
incorrect answer
AUC = 1
Npos × Nneg
Npos
∑
i=1
Nneg
∑
j=1
I(Ci > C j), (3)
where Npos and Nneg denote the counts of correct (positive) and incorrect 
(negative) answers, respectively. Ci and Cj represent the confidence 
scores of the ith and jth correct and incorrect answers, respectively. I 
is an indicator function, which equals 1 if Ci > Cj and 0 otherwise. This 
method evaluates each pair of correct and incorrect answers to deter-
mine if the confidence score for the correct answer surpasses that of 
the incorrect one. The AUC is then the fraction of these pairs satisfying 
this criterion, measuring the capability of confidence scores to dif -
ferentiate between correct and incorrect responses, with AUC values 
ranging from 0.5 (indicating no better than chance discrimination) to 
1 (signifying perfect discrimination).
Statistical analysis
T o assess statistical significance, we utilize BFs to determine the extent 
to which the observed data adjust our belief in the alternative and null 
hypotheses. Values of 3 < BF < 10 and BF >10 indicate moderate and 
strong evidence against the null hypothesis, respectively. Similarly, 
values of 1/10 < BF < 1/3 and BF <1/10 indicate moderate and strong 
evidence in favour of the null hypothesis, respectively. We report BFs 
for Bayesian t-tests using the default priors as recommended by ref. 52.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature 
Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
All behavioural data as well as data produced by the LLMs used in this 
study are publicly available via the Open Science Framework (OSF) at 
https://osf.io/y7pr6/ (ref. 53). Source data are provided with this paper.
Code availability
The code used for data analysis and extracting LLM model confidence 
is available via OSF at https://osf.io/y7pr6/ (ref. 53).
References
1. Budescu, D. V., Por, H.-H., Broomell, S. B. & Smithson, M. The 
interpretation of IPCC probabilistic statements around the world. 
Nat. Clim. Change 4, 508–512 (2014).
2. Ho, E. H., Budescu, D. V., Dhami, M. K. & Mandel, D. R. Improving 
the communication of uncertainty in climate science and 
intelligence analysis. Behav. Sci. Policy 1, 43–55 (2015).
3. Karelitz, T. M., Dhami, M. K., Budescu, D. V. & Wallsten, T. S. 
Toward a universal translator of verbal probabilities. In Proc. 
15th International Florida Artificial Intelligence Research Society 
Conference (eds Haller, M. S. & Simmons, G.) 498–502 (AAAI 
Press, 2002).
4. Wallsten, T. S., Shlomi, Y. & Ting, H. Final Report for Research 
Contract ‘Expressing Probability in Intelligence Analysis’ (2008).

--- PDF PAGE 10 ---
Nature Machine Intelligence | Volume 7 | February 2025 | 221–231 230
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-024-00976-7
5. O’Brien, B. J. Words or numbers? The evaluation of probability 
expressions in general practice. J. R. Coll. Gen. Pract. 39, 
98–100 (1989).
6. Ali, S. R., Dobbs, T. D., Hutchings, H. A. & Whitaker, I. S. Using 
ChatGPT to write patient clinic letters. Lancet Digit. Health 5, 
179–181 (2023).
7. Zambrano, A. F. et al. From nCoder to ChatGPT: from automated 
coding to refining human coding. In Proc. International 
Conference on Quantitative Ethnography (eds Arastoopour Irgens, 
G. & Knight, S.) 470–485 (Springer, 2023).
8. Whalen, J. et al. ChatGPT: challenges, opportunities, and 
implications for teacher education. Contemp. Iss. Technol. Teach. 
Educ. 23, 1–23 (2023).
9. Jo, A. The promise and peril of generative AI. Nature 614, 214–216 
(2023).
10. Huang, L. et al. A survey on hallucination in large language 
models: principles, taxonomy, challenges, and open questions. 
Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.05232 (2024).
11. Introducing ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2022).
12. Achiam, J. et al. GPT-4 technical report. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/
abs/2303.08774 (2023).
13. Kadavath, S. et al. Language models (mostly) know what  
they know. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.05221  
(2022).
14. Srivastava, A. et al. Beyond the imitation game: quantifying and 
extrapolating the capabilities of language models. Trans. Mach. 
Learn. Res. (2023).
15. Yin, Z. et al. Do large language models know what they don’t 
know? In Proc. Findings of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics (eds Rogers, A. et al.) 8653–8665 (ACL, 2023).
16. Azaria, A. & Mitchell, T. in Findings of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 (eds Bouamor, H. et al.) 
967–976 (ACL, 2023).
17. Farquhar, S., Kossen, J., Kuhn, L. & Gal, Y. Detecting hallucinations 
in large language models using semantic entropy. Nature 630, 
625–630 (2024).
18. Jiang, Z., Araki, J., Ding, H. & Neubig, G. How can we know when 
language models know? On the calibration of language models 
for question answering. Trans. Assoc. Comput. Linguist. 9, 
962–977 (2021).
19. Hendrycks, D. et al. Measuring massive multitask language 
understanding. In Proc. International Conference on Learning 
Representations (2021).
20. GPT-3.5 (OpenAI, 2022).
21. Anil, R. et al. Palm 2 Technical Report (2023).
22. Joshi, M., Choi, E., Weld, D. S. & Zettlemoyer, L. Triviaqa: a 
large scale distantly supervised challenge dataset for reading 
comprehension. In Proc. 55th Annual Meeting of the Association 
for Computational Linguistics Vol. 1 (eds Barzilay, R. & Kan, M.-Y.) 
1601–1611 (ACL, 2017).
23. Xiao, Y. et al. in Findings of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics: EMNLP 2022 (eds Goldberg, Y. et al.) 7273–7284 
(ACL, 2022).
24. Xiong, M. et al. Can LLMs express their uncertainty? an empirical 
evaluation of confidence elicitation in LLMs. In The Twelfth 
International Conference on Learning Representations  
(2024).
25. Tanneru, S. H., Agarwal, C. & Lakkaraju, H. Quantifying uncertainty 
in natural language explanations of large language models. In 
International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics 
1072–1080 (PMLR, 2024).
26. Zhou, K., Hwang, J., Ren, X. & Sap, M. in Relying on the Unreliable: 
The Impact of Language Models’ Reluctance to Express  
Uncertainty 3623–3643 (Association for Computational 
Linguistics, 2024).
27. Petty, R. E. & Cacioppo, J. T. The effects of involvement on 
responses to argument quantity and quality: central and peripheral 
routes to persuasion. J. Person. Soc. Psychol. 46, 69 (1984).
28. Oppenheimer, D. M. Consequences of erudite vernacular utilized 
irrespective of necessity: problems with using long words 
needlessly. Appl. Cogn. Psychol. 20, 139–156 (2006).
29. Goldberg, A. et al. Peer reviews of peer reviews: a randomized 
controlled trial and other experiments. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/
abs/2311.09497 (2023).
30. Ouyang, L. et al. Training language models to follow instructions 
with human feedback. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 35,  
27730–27744 (2022).
31. Bower, A. H., Han, N., Soni, A., Eckstein, M. P. & Steyvers, M. How 
experts and novices judge other people’s knowledgeability from 
language use. Psychonom. Bull. Rev. 1–11 (2024).
32. Saito, K., Wachi, A., Wataoka, K. & Akimoto, Y. Verbosity bias in 
preference labeling by large language models. Preprint at  
https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.10076 (2023).
33. Mather, M., Shafir, E. & Johnson, M. K. Misremembrance of 
options past: source monitoring and choice. Psychol. Sci. 11, 
132–138 (2000).
34. Rong, Y. et al. Towards human-centered explainable AI: a survey 
of user studies for model explanations. In Proc. IEEE Transactions 
on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence Vol. 46 1–20  
(IEEE, 2023).
35. Smith-Renner, A. et al. No explainability without accountability: an 
empirical study of explanations and feedback in interactive ML. 
In Proc. 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems 1–13 (Association for Computing Machinery, 2020).
36. Feng, S. & Boyd-Graber, J. What can AI do for me? Evaluating 
machine learning interpretations in cooperative play. In Proc. 24th 
International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces  
(eds Fu, W.-T. & Pan, S.) 229–239 (ACL, 2019).
37. Steyvers, M. & Kumar, A. Three challenges for AI-assisted 
decision-making. Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 19, 722–734 (2023).
38. Bansal, G. et al. Does the whole exceed its parts? The effect of AI 
explanations on complementary team performance. In Proc. 2021 
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems  
(eds Kitamura, Y. & Quigley, A.) 1–16 (ACL, 2021).
39. Buçinca, Z., Malaya, M. B. & Gajos, K. Z. To trust or to think: 
cognitive forcing functions can reduce overreliance on AI in 
AI-assisted decision-making. Proc. ACM Hum. Comput. Interact. 5, 
1–21 (2021).
40. Wang, X. & Yin, M. Effects of explanations in AI-assisted decision 
making: principles and comparisons. ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. 
Syst. 12, 1–36 (2022).
41. Hoffmann, J. et al. Training compute-optimal large language 
models. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.15556 (2022).
42. Rae, J. W. et al. Scaling language models: methods, analysis 
& insights from training gopher. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/
abs/2112.11446 (2021).
43. Geng, J. et al. A survey of language model confidence estimation 
and calibration. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.08298 (2023).
44. Zhou, K., Jurafsky, D. & Hashimoto, T. Navigating the grey area: 
how expressions of uncertainty and overconfidence affect 
language models. In Proc. 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods 
in Natural Language Processing 5506–5524 (Association for 
Computational Linguistics, 2023).
45. Lin, S., Hilton, J. & Evans, O. Teaching models to express their 
uncertainty in words. Trans. Mach. Learn. Res. (2022).
46. Tian, K. et al. Just ask for calibration: strategies for eliciting 
calibrated confidence scores from language models fine-tuned 
with human feedback. In Proc. 2023 Conference on Empirical 
Methods in Natural Language Processing 5433–5442 (Association 
for Computational Linguistics, 2023).

--- PDF PAGE 11 ---
Nature Machine Intelligence | Volume 7 | February 2025 | 221–231
 231
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-024-00976-7
47. Fleming, S. M. & Lau, H. C. How to measure metacognition. Front. 
Hum. Neurosci. 8, 443 (2014).
48. Guo, C., Pleiss, G., Sun, Y. & Weinberger, K. Q. On calibration of 
modern neural networks. In Proc. 34th International Conference 
on Machine Learning (eds Precup, D. & Teh, Y. W.) vol. 70 of 
Proceedings of Machine Learning Research 1321–1330  
(PMLR, 2017).
49. Naeini, M. P., Cooper, G. & Hauskrecht, M. Obtaining well 
calibrated probabilities using Bayesian binning. In Proc. AAAI 
Conference on Artificial Intelligence Vol. 29 2901–2907 
(AAAI, 2015).
50. Kumar, A., Liang, P. S. & Ma, T. Verified uncertainty calibration. 
Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 32, (2019).
51. Gruber, S. & Buettner, F. Better uncertainty calibration via proper 
scores for classification and beyond. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 
35, 8618–8632 (2022).
52. Rouder, J. N., Morey, R. D., Speckman, P. L. & Province, J. M. 
Default Bayes factors for ANOVA designs. J. Math. Psychol. 56, 
356–374 (2012).
53. Steyvers, M., Tejeda, H. & Belem, C. What large language  
models know and what people think they know. OSF  
https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/Y7PR6 (2024).
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the National Science Foundation 
under award number 1900644 (P.S. and M.S.)
Author contributions
M.S. and P.S. conceptualized and designed the study. M.S., A.K., C.B., 
S.K., L.W.M. and X.H. developed methodology for the behavioural 
experiments. H.T. implemented and conducted the behavioural 
experiments. M.S. analysed the data. M.S. and A.K. wrote the first draft. 
H.T., C.B., S.K., L.W.M. and P.S. reviewed and edited the paper.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Extended data is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
s42256-024-00976-7.
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary 
material available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-024-00976-7.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to 
Mark Steyvers.
Reprints and permissions information is available at  
www.nature.com/reprints.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, 
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, 
as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the 
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate 
if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless 
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use 
is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you 
will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view 
a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2025

--- PDF PAGE 12 ---
Nature Machine Intelligence
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-024-00976-7
Extended Data Fig. 1 | Example prompts for multiple choice and short-answer 
questions. Example prompt to elicit model confidence for a multiple-choice 
question (top) and short-answer question (bottom). For the multiple-choice 
question, the prompt elicits the answer and model confidence across answer 
options. Note that for the short-answer question, the LLM answer (dove) was 
elicited through another prompt.

--- PDF PAGE 13 ---
Nature Machine Intelligence
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-024-00976-7
Extended Data Fig. 2 | Illustration of the behavioral experiment interface. 
Illustration of the behavioral experiment interface used to conduct the multiple-
choice experiments. The left panel displays the experimental interface during 
phase 1 of the task, where participants evaluate the probability that the LLM is 
correct based on the explanation. The right panel displays the experimental 
interface during phase 2 of the task, where participants answer the multiple-
choice question with the assistance of the LLM.

--- PDF PAGE 14 ---


--- PDF PAGE 15 ---


--- PDF PAGE 16 ---
