--- PDF PAGE 1 ---
CodeWatcher: IDE Telemetry Data Extraction Tool
for Understanding Coding Interactions with LLMs
Manaal Basha 1, Aime ˆe M. Ribeiro 2, Jeena Javahar 1, Cleidson R. B. de Souza 2
Gema Rodr´ıguez-P´erez1, 1University of British Columbia, Kelowna 2Federal University of Par ´a
manaals@student.ubc.ca,aimee@ufpa.br,jeenajavahar@gmail.com,
cleidson.desouza@acm.org,gerope@mail.ubc.ca
Abstract—Understanding how developers interact with code
generation tools (CGTs) requires detailed, real-time data on
programming behavior which is often difficult to collect without
disrupting workflow. We presentCodeWatcher, a lightweight,
unobtrusive client-server system designed to capture fine-grained
interaction events from within the Visual Studio Code (VS Code)
editor.CodeWatcherlogs semantically meaningful events such
as insertions made by CGTs, deletions, copy-paste actions, and
focus shifts, enabling continuous monitoring of developer activity
without modifying user workflows. The system comprises a VS
Code plugin, a Python-based RESTful API, and a MongoDB
backend, all containerized for scalability and ease of deploy-
ment. By structuring and timestamping each event,CodeWatcher
enables post-hoc reconstruction of coding sessions and facilitates
rich behavioral analyses, including how and when CGTs are
used during development. This infrastructure is crucial for
supporting research on responsible AI, developer productivity,
and the human-centered evaluation of CGTs. Please find the
demo, diagrams, and tool here.
Index Terms—Code Generation, Telemetry, VS Code, Plugin
I. INTRODUCTION
Understanding how programmers write code, beyond just a
correct final product has been a challenge in both computer
science education and in industry [1]. This understanding is
essential for improving tool support, enhancing productivity,
and identifying usability challenges within IDEs. Traditional
methods of evaluating code such as test cases or static analysis
typically checks correctness or style after the code is written.
These approaches although helpful, offer limited insight into
the process of writing code and can struggle to support
developers during moments of confusion, experimentation, or
problem solving [2].
In educational contexts, novice programmers frequently
struggle to identify and correct mistakes as they write code,
particularly when using code generation tools (CGTs) [1]
such as GitHub Copilot 1 or Amazon Q 2 which generate code
within the IDE. Providing timely, formative feedback during
the coding process can improve learning outcomes, retention,
and engagement in programming [3], [4]. However, large class
sizes or online settings often make it infeasible for instructors
to deliver personalized feedback at scale. Existing tools such
1https://github.com/features/copilot
2https://aws.amazon.com/q/
as AutoGrader3, Coding Rooms4, and CodeWorkout5 automate
assessments, but typically focus on correctness or syntax,
missing deeper behavioural indicators like confusion, exces-
sive rewriting, or blind copy-pasting. While process-aware
tools such as OverCode [5] attempt to visualize student code
patterns, they often lack real-time monitoring and rely on batch
analysis.
In industry, software engineering teams also benefit from
understanding how developers code in relation to tasks such as
during onboarding [6], debugging [7], and code reviews [8].
Prior research has shown that developer telemetry, which is
data about interactions with editors, compilers, and version
control systems, can identify productivity bottlenecks and
support developer success [9], [10], [11], [12]. However, most
industrial tooling is proprietary, emphasizes aggregate metrics,
and lacks detailed or customizable feedback suitable for edu-
cational use or behavioral analysis. Furthermore, current CGTs
are based on LLMs that offer single and multiline suggestions
and have been affecting developers’ workflow. More studies
about these tools rely on surveys, video recordings, and inter-
views [13], [14], [15], [16], [17] (with two exceptions [11],
[18]). These studies primarily focus on users’ reactions rather
than capturing real-time CGT interaction data within the IDE,
an area whereCodeWatcheroffers a unique contribution.
CodeWatcheraddresses the lack of detailed and scalable
interaction telemetry data for CGTs used in the IDE.Code-
Watcheris a client-server system that captures detailed pro-
gramming events (e.g., insertions, deletions, copy/paste, focus
shifts), is compatible across multiple CGTs and programming
languages, and can support real-time feedback through a rule-
based engine. Instructors or team leads can define custom rules
that trigger alerts or suggestions based on coding behavior
data. Unlike traditional tools that focus solely on code correct-
ness,CodeWatcherhighlights how the code was written with
CGTs, offering process-level visibility like frequent rework,
use of LLMs, or idle time.
II. RELATEDWORK
That development of tools that capture and analyze user
interactions within IDEs is crucial for understanding pro-
grammer behaviour and improving software development pro-
3https://autograder.io/
4https://www.codingrooms.com/
5https://codeworkout.cs.vt.edu/
arXiv:2510.11536v1  [cs.SE]  13 Oct 2025

--- PDF PAGE 2 ---
cesses. Existing research highlights the need for tools that
can track various aspects of developer activity, including
code changes, IDE commands, and cognitive processes. For
instance, TaskTracker, a plugin for IntelliJ-based IDEs, collects
code snapshots and user actions during programming tasks
[19]. Similarly, DFLOW records interaction data, enabling
analysis of time spent on different activities like editing and
navigating code. These tools demonstrate the value of tracking
IDE interactions for understanding developer behavior. How-
ever, they often lack the ability to simultaneously capture other
forms of behavioral data, such as eye-tracking data, which can
provide insights into cognitive processes [20].
To address this limitation, CodeGRITS was developed as a
plugin for JetBrains IDEs to track both IDE interactions and
eye gaze data [18]. This tool allows researchers to combine
these complementary approaches for a more comprehensive
understanding of developer behavior. Furthermore, the emer-
gence of LLMs in software development necessitates tools
that can track the use and impact of AI-generated code.
For instance, WaitGPT transforms AI-generated code into an
interactive visual representation, enabling users to monitor and
steer data analysis performed by LLMs [21].
Techniques to assist with distinguishing between human-
written and CGT code across multiple coding languages with
high accuracy such as through AI code stylometry classifiers
[22] could help to better understand user interactions in CGTs.
However, this method can be tedious as it requires having and
utilizing a relevant dataset to train a transformer based encoder
classifier for such a task.
While these tools or methods offer valuable insights into
developer behavior and the use of LLMs, a gap remains in
tools that can specifically track data or metrics related to AI
code suggestions, acceptance rates, and code reuse patterns.
TheCodeWatchertool aims to fill this gap by providing
researchers with the ability to extract and analyze data related
to AI-generated code within the IDE, enabling a deeper
understanding of the impact of AI on software development
practices.
III. EVENTCAPTURE ANDREPRESENTATION
A core capability ofCodeWatcherlies in its ability to
unobtrusively capture detailed programmer activity by logging
semantically meaningful events from the developer’s IDE. It
specifically logs user interactions with CGTs and not general
coding behavior. The system is designed to balance fidelity
with minimal intrusiveness, enabling continuous, real-time
data extraction of code authoring behaviors without requiring
changes to user workflows.
TheCodeWatcherclient plugin monitors eight distinct event
types that reflect key aspects of interaction during a coding
session:Start,End,Insertion,Deletion,Focus,Unfocus,
Copy, andPaste. Each event is recorded as a structured object
containing up to four fields:
•Type– the event category (e.g.,Insertion,Focus);
•Time– a timestamp (ms precision) marking the event
occurrence;
•Text– the relevant code snippet or user input (when
applicable); and
•Line– the full line of code where the event occurred (for
insertions and deletions).
Not all fields are applicable to every event type. Table I
summarizes the semantics of each event and the associated
fields.
TABLE I
EVENTTYPES ANDCAPTUREDFIELDS INCODEWATCHER
Event
Type
Description Captured Fields
Start Triggered when a new file
is opened and becomes ac-
tive in the editor.
Time- records the moment
the document is opened and
editing begins
End Triggered when the file is
removed from focus.
Time- captures the moment
the editing session ends.
Insertion Logged when code is
pasted from outside the
IDE (including IDE chats)
or code suggestion accep-
tances that are more than 3
characters, reducing noise
from keystroke input.
Time- captures the time
when the increase in text is
detected,
Text- the newly inserted text,
Line- the entire line of code
where the insertion occurred
Deletion Logged when any con-
tent is removed, whether
single-character or multi-
line.
Time- the time when the text
is deleted,
Text- the text of the removed
content,
Line- the line where the dele-
tion took place
Unfocus Recorded when the user
switches away from the
IDE.
Time- records the time when
the IDE loses focus
Focus Recorded when the IDE
regains focus from another
application.
Time- records the time when
the IDE regains focus
Copy Detected upon executing
a copy command (e.g.,
CTRL+C) within the IDE.
Time- the time when the
copy command is executed,
Text- the copied content
Paste Triggered on paste com-
mand (e.g.,CTRL+V); the
subsequentInsertioncap-
tures the actual content.
Time- the time when the
paste command is executed
Text- the newly pasted text
The plugin is optimized for minimal overhead, relying
on native editor hooks to track text manipulation and focus
changes. To reduce noise, it filters out character-level inputs
and aggregates small edits into higher-levelInsertionandDele-
tionevents. Importantly, the system disambiguates between
typed input, specifically collecting code generation acceptance
data and pasted content. By capturing this rich sequence
of temporally ordered, context-aware events,CodeWatcher
enables both real-time intervention and post-hoc reconstruction
of development sessions involving CGTs. This data forms
the basis for CGT usage analysis, behavioral modeling, and
personalized feedback mechanisms.
IV. TOOLARCHITECTURE
CodeWatcheris implemented as a modular, client-server
system composed of three primary components: a VS Code
plugin (client), a RESTful API (server), and a backend
database. This architecture supports ease of maintenance, de-
ployment scalability, and flexible integration with workflows.

--- PDF PAGE 3 ---
A. Client-Server Communication
The front-end component ofCodeWatcheris a VS Code
plugin written in JavaScript. Operating locally within the
developer’s environment, the plugin is responsible for unob-
trusively capturing interaction events within the editor such
as code insertions, deletions, and focus changes. This is then
transmitted to the backend API over HTTP when there is an
endevent type.
Communication between the plugin and the server adheres
to RESTful principles. Event data is encoded in JSON format
and sent via HTTP requests to predefined API endpoints. The
API, implemented in Python using the FastAPI framework, is
designed around the service-repository architectural patterns
to promote separation of concerns.
The API exposes a variety of endpoints that support key
operations including user account creation, login, interaction
log registration, user deletion, and permission management.
Input validation is handled via Pydantic models, ensuring data
consistency and integrity prior to storage. All communication
is routed through a remote server running Ubuntu, where the
API and the database are deployed using Docker containers.
B. Database Schema
The backend database is implemented using MongoDB,
selected for its schema-less structure and flexibility in handling
diverse interaction log formats. Two primary collections are
part of the storage layer:user, andinteraction_logs.
Theusercollection stores all user credentials, metadata, and
access-level permissions. Whereasinteraction_logs
contain structured records of all IDE events, each annotated
with metadata like those seen in Table I.
Event documents are stored as JSON-like objects, enabling
dynamic schema evolution as the set of tracked events ex-
pands. MongoDB Compass is used for monitoring and query-
ing the database during development and analysis of phases.
V. VALIDATION ANDTESTING
To validateCodeWatcher, we confirmed the accuracy and
completeness of the data it collects and transmits to the server.
This includes ensuring the tool captures the correct event
types, attributes, and timestamps during development activity.
A. Validation Methodology and Results
We validatedCodeWatcher’s ability to accurately and reli-
ably log user interactions by designing a set of controlled test
scenarios (Table II) aligned with the following key objectives:
•Correct Event Detection:Each user interaction (e.g., in-
sertions, deletions, copy-paste, file start/end) is correctly
identified and logged.
•Field-Level Accuracy:Captured metadata (e.g., time,
text, line content) precisely reflects the editor state.
•Transmission Integrity:Ensures events are transmitted
to the server without data loss or corruption.
•System Robustness:Operates reliably under realistic and
edge-case IDE usage patterns.
TABLE II
VALIDATIONMETRICSACROSSSCENARIOSSUMMARY
Scenario Event Type(s) Precision Recall
Insertion Accuracy Insertion 1.00 1.00
Deletion Detection Deletion 1.00 1.00
Copy-Paste Behav-
ior
Copy, Paste
Focus Switching Focus, Unfocus 0.87 1.00
Back-and-Forth Use
Patterns
Insertion, Deletion 1.00 1.00
Multiple File Ses-
sions
Start, Insertion
(across tabs/file),
end
1.00 1.00
Event Logging Un-
der Load (1 user)
All events 0.93 1.00
Concurrent Users All events (stress
test)
1.00 1.00
To verify these goals, we ran 150 trials with 2 users
simulating realistic developer workflows. For each event type,
we triggered interactions manually and checked server-side
logs for accuracy. Our validation process used:
•Exact Match Verification:For event types involving
code changes (e.g., Insertion, Deletion, Paste), we con-
firmed that the loggedTextandLinefields exactly
matched the actual editor content at the time of the event.
•Timestamp Validation:We ensured that all logged
events reflected the correct temporal order by comparing
timestamps to externally recorded wall-clock timings
(e.g., from screen recordings).
Where applicable, we also validated correct identification
of event types (e.g., Copy, Focus, Start) and ensured they
appeared in the correct sequence. Table II summarizes the
precision and recall metrics obtained during these tests. These
results demonstrateCodeWatcher’s robustness in capturing
fine-grained user behaviors across a variety of realistic usage
patterns.
B. Robustness Under Diverse Use Cases
We also validated behavior under more realistic usage
scenarios such as:
•Rapid Back-and-Forth Use Patterns:Simulated high-
speed editing and undo-redo operations.
•Multi-line Suggestion Acceptance:Accepted multiple
lines from code suggestions to validate correct grouping
and event generation (part of insertion validation).
•Multiple File Sessions:Utilized multiple files in parallel
to test session consistency and file-scoped logging.
•Concurrent Users:Ran parallel sessions to ensure iso-
lated logging and user separation with users.
C. Summary of Findings
Across all scenarios, on average,CodeWatcheraccurately
detected and logged user interactions in accordance with
the specification in Table I. Captured data was successfully
transmitted to the server, and timestamps and content fields
aligned with observed behavior in the IDE. This validation
confirms thatCodeWatcherreliably captures raw behavioral

--- PDF PAGE 4 ---
data necessary for downstream analyses, without relying
on assumptions about specific analytics workflows or post-
processing interpretations.
VI. EMPIRICALUSECASEEXAMPLE: IDENTIFYINGAI
GENERATEDCODE
Algorithm 1Algorithm for Categorizing Coding Interactions
Input:CodeWatcherlogs (JSON), Final submitted code (text file)
Output:Line-by-line labels:AI-Generated,AI-Modified, orUser-Written
Step 1: Load and Preprocess Data
Load the JSON file and extract historical code lines. Read the final code
file and split it into individual lines, normalize, and strip whitespace.
Step 2: Compare Lines and Compute Similarity
foreachlineL f in final codedo
foreachlineL h in historical datado
Compute fuzzy similarity scoreS(L f , Lh)
LetL best be the historical line with highest score
Step 3: Label Line Based on Similarity Score
ifS(L f , Lbest)≥95then
LabelL f asAI-Generated
else
if80≤S(L f , Lbest)<95then
LabelL f asAI-Modified
else
LabelL f asUser-Written
Step 4: Save Output
Store labeled lines into a structured JSON output file
TheCodeWatchertool can enable researchers to analyze
the authorship of code submissions by linking keystroke-level
interaction data with the final program output. To illustrate
this, we implemented a post-processing script to be run in the
server side, that determines whether each line of code in a final
code submission was generated by a CGT, CGT generated but
modified by the user, or entirely written by the user. This
classification process begins withCodeWatcher’s JSON log
files, which record the code inserted from the CGT during the
programming session. The final submitted code file is then
compared to the historical logs (i.e., data fromCodeWatcher
logs) using a fuzzy string matching algorithm (described in 1)
that computes similarity scores between corresponding lines.
Based on these scores, the script labels lines asAI-Generated
(score≥95),AI-Modified(score between 80 and 94), or
User-Written(score<80). This labeling allows researchers
to quantify the extent of AI assistance, identify instances of
user engagement or editing, and evaluate how students or
developers interact with generative coding tools. The output
can be further validated using precision, and recall, and F1-
score metrics against manually annotated ground truth data.
The methodology is reproducible, and adaptable across diverse
datasets of coding activity.
The results on three developers completing easy tasks show
on average, 68% of the code written by participants was
directly generated by an AI tool, 7% was AI-generated but
modified by the user, and 25% was entirely user-written. The
classification algorithm demonstrated high precision (77%)
but moderate recall (41.5%). These results suggest that our
use ofCodeWatcherdata provides a promising foundation
for reliably distinguishing between AI- and user-written code,
though further improvements are needed to enhance sensitivity.
VII. USECASES
This section presents a set of use cases in which we envision
CodeWatcherbeing used.
Educational Feedback and Assessment:In academic set-
tings instructors can use the data fromCodeWatcherto un-
derstand how students approach assignments beyond grading
final code submissions.CodeWatcherdata can help identify
when students overly on AI-generated completions or copy-
paste code without meaningful engagement, supporting a
better assessment of student effort and understanding. It can
also inform curriculum refinement by revealing recurring pain
points across peers.
Research on Programming Behaviour:CodeWatcherof-
fers researchers a robust platform for studying how novice
and expert programmers interact with code, IDEs, and CGTs.
It enables the collection of rich temporal and behavioral data,
allowing for analyses of strategies such as incremental devel-
opment, test-driven coding, or (over-)reliance on AI comple-
tions. Researchers can conduct controlled studies to compare
coding behaviors across tools, environments, or demographics
(e.g., native vs. non-native English speakers, gender groups) to
assess how these factors influence learning and performance.
Such data is critical for understanding equity in CS education
and the role of AI in shaping different learners’ experiences.
CGT Evaluation:CodeWatchercan be used to assess the
utility, limitations, and impacts of CGTs on user interactions
and outcomes. By logging all interactions with these tools
such as when completions are accepted or edited, researchers
can better explore where CGTs are helpful, confusing, or
misused. These insights can inform refinements to AI sugges-
tion engines, particularly in how suggestions are presented or
triggered.CodeWatcherdata can also be used for retrospective
attribution of which code segments were likely AI-generated
versus hand-written, helping to disentangle human and ma-
chine contributions in collaborative development.
Industry Applications:Development teams can useCode-
Watcherdata to evaluate productivity based on interaction
richness, and task-switching patterns. This can help identify
blockers, improve tooling, or streamline workflows. For on-
boarding,CodeWatcherallows teams to monitor how new
developers learn internal systems and identify areas where
additional support is needed. Engineering leads can also use
CodeWatcherto evaluate the adoption and real-world utility
of new IDE features or plugins, identifying friction points
or unused capabilities. In regulated industries or high-stakes
collaborations,CodeWatcherlogs may serve as provenance
data for audit trails, particularly when code authorship must
be clarified.
Ethics, Fairness, and AI Accountability:CodeWatcher
contributes to responsible AI practices by enhancing trans-
parency and traceability in code authored with CGTs. As
AI-generated code becomes increasingly prevalent in both
educational and industrial contexts, distinguishing between

--- PDF PAGE 5 ---
human and machine contributions is crucial for fair grading,
authorship attribution, and intellectual property claims. It can
also help identify potential biases in CGTs by revealing dis-
parities in suggestion acceptance or effectiveness across user
groups.CodeWatcherempowers educators, researchers, and
organizations to promote fairness, accountability, and informed
decision-making in AI-assisted development.
IDE Personalization and Smart Interventions:Finally,
CodeWatcherlays the groundwork for intelligent, personalized
IDEs. Real-time data on user interaction can be used to trigger
context-sensitive interventions—such as hints, documentation
links, or debugging suggestions such as when a user appears
to be struggling. Over time, this data can also inform IDE
adaptations that suggest shortcuts, identify common errors, or
recommend tools tailored to individual developer workflows.
By supporting these smart, adaptive features,CodeWatchercan
transform the static IDE into a more responsive and supportive
learning and development environment.
VIII. LIMITATIONS
CodeWatchermay not work as expected with different IDEs
or CGTs, and does require a server for the user to connect to
the tool so that the data is uploaded in real-time. However, the
tool can be setup to run on a local server or locally without
a server upload. Web-inserted code logs as unfocus and then
insertion not paste, hinting it’s not AI, but remains error-prone.
The tool intentionally does not capture text that is not part of
the coding language of the file. For example if a user inserts
text that is not considered code, or a comment, the tool will
not capture this as to avoid irrelevant data. This can make the
plugin data less useful for those interested in such data.
IX. CONCLUSION
We presentedCodeWatcher, a lightweight plugin that cap-
tures coding interactions in the presence of CGTs. Our empiri-
cal use case shows how this data supports classification of AI-
generated, AI-modified, and user-written code.CodeWatcher
offers a practical foundation for studying CGT usage and
developer behavior with minimal overhead.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank GOOGLECA (PWPU GR028067) and CNPq
(420406/2023-9 and 442779/2023-2) for funding this research.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Barke, M. B. James, and N. Polikarpova, “Grounded copilot: How
programmers interact with code-generating models,”Proceedings of the
ACM on Programming Languages, vol. 7, pp. 85–111, 2023.
[2] S. H. Edwards, “Using test-driven development in the classroom,” in
Proceedings of the 35th SIGCSE technical symposium on Computer
science education, 2004.
[3] R. Shen, D. Y . Wohn, and M. J. Lee, “Comparison of learning
programming between interactive computer tutors and human teachers,”
inProceedings of the ACM Conference on Global Computing
Education, ser. CompEd ’19. New York, NY , USA: Association
for Computing Machinery, 2019, p. 2–8. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3300115.3309506
[4] A. K. Veerasamy, M.-J. Laakso, and D. D’Souza, “Formative assessment
tasks as indicators of student engagement for predicting at-risk students
in programming courses,”Informatics in education, vol. 21, no. 2, pp.
375–393, 2022.
[5] E. L. Glassman, J. Scott, R. Singh, P. J. Guo, and R. C. Miller,
“Overcode: Visualizing variation in student solutions to programming
problems at scale,”ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., vol. 22, no. 2,
Mar. 2015. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/2699751
[6] A. Ju, H. Sajnani, S. Kelly, and K. Herzig, “A case study of onboarding
in software teams: Tasks and strategies,” in43rd International Confer-
ence on Software Engineering. IEEE, 2021, pp. 613–623.
[7] T. Hirsch and B. Hofer, “What we can learn from how programmers
debug their code,” in2021 IEEE/ACM 8th International Workshop
on Software Engineering Research and Industrial Practice (SER&IP).
IEEE, 2021, pp. 37–40.
[8] A. K. Turzo and A. Bosu, “What makes a code review useful to
opendev developers? an empirical investigation,”Empirical Software
Engineering, vol. 29, no. 1, p. 6, 2024.
[9] M. Beller, A. Park, K. Nakad, A. Patel, S. Mohanty, F. Garberson, I. G.
Malone, V . Garg, H. Verroken, A. Kennedyet al., “What’s dat? three
case studies of measuring software development productivity at meta
with diff authoring time,”arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.10977, 2025.
[10] K. Z. Cui, M. Demirer, S. Jaffe, L. Musolff, S. Peng, and T. Salz, “The
productivity effects of generative ai: Evidence from a field experiment
with github copilot,” 2024.
[11] A. Ziegler, E. Kalliamvakou, X. A. Li, A. Rice, D. Rifkin, S. Simister,
G. Sittampalam, and E. Aftandilian, “Measuring github copilot’s impact
on productivity,”Commun. ACM, vol. 67, no. 3, p. 54–63, Feb. 2024.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3633453
[12] A. N. Meyer, T. Fritz, G. C. Murphy, and T. Zimmermann, “Software
developers’ perceptions of productivity,” inProceedings of the 22nd
ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Foundations of Software
Engineering, ser. FSE 2014. New York, NY , USA: Association
for Computing Machinery, 2014, p. 19–29. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/2635868.2635892
[13] S. Barke, M. James, and N. Polikarpova, “Grounded copilot: How
programmers interact with code-generating models,”Association for
Computing Machinery, vol. 7, April 2023.
[14] P. Vaithilingam, T. Zhang, and E. L. Glassman, “Expectation vs. ex-
perience: Evaluating the usability of code generation tools powered by
large language models,” inConference on human factors in computing
systems extended abstracts, 2022, pp. 1–7.
[15] F. F. Xu, B. Vasilescu, and G. Neubig, “In-ide code generation from nat-
ural language: Promise and challenges,”ACM Transactions on Software
Engineering and Methodology, vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 1–47, 2022.
[16] W. Mendes, S. Souza, and C. De Souza, “”you’re on a bicycle with
a little motor”: Benefits and challenges of using ai code assistants,”
inIEEE/ACM 17th International Conference on Cooperative and
Human Aspects of Software Engineering, ser. CHASE ’24. New
York, NY , USA: ACM, 2024, p. 144–152. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3641822.3641882
[17] R. Wang, R. Cheng, D. Ford, and T. Zimmermann, “Investigating
and designing for trust in ai-powered code generation tools,” in
Proceedings of the 2024 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability,
and Transparency, ser. FAccT ’24. New York, NY , USA: Association
for Computing Machinery, 2024, p. 1475–1493. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3630106.3658984
[18] N. Tang, J. An, M. Chen, A. Bansal, Y . Huang, C. McMillan, and
T. J.-J. Li, “Codegrits: A research toolkit for developer behavior and
eye tracking in ide,” in46th International Conference on Software
Engineering Companion (ICSE-Companion ’24). ACM, 2024.
[19] E. Lyulina, A. Birillo, V . Kovalenko, and T. Bryksin, “Tasktracker-
tool: A toolkit for tracking of code snapshots and activity data during
solution of programming tasks,” in52nd ACM Technical Symposium on
Computer Science Education, 2021, pp. 495–501.
[20] R. Minelli, A. Mocci, and M. Lanza, “I know what you did last summer
- an investigation of how developers spend their time,” inIEEE 23rd
International Conference on Program Comprehension, 2015, pp. 25–35.
[21] L. Xie, C. Zheng, H. Xia, H. Qu, and C. Zhu-Tian, “Waitgpt: Monitoring
and steering conversational llm agent in data analysis with on-the-fly
code visualization,” in37th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface
Software and Technology, 2024, pp. 1–14.
[22] A. Gurioli, M. Gabbrielli, and S. Zacchiroli, “Is this you, llm? rec-
ognizing ai-written programs with multilingual code stylometry,”arXiv
preprint arXiv:2412.14611, 2024.