--- PDF PAGE 1 ---
RESEARCH IN PROGRESS 
Mallory Selfridge, Donald J. Dickerson, and Stanley F. Biggs 
Cognitive Expert Systems and Machine 
Learning: Artificial Intelligence Research at the 
University of Connecticut 
Research at the Artificial Intelligence Laboratory of the Uni- 
versity of Connecticut is currently focused on a number of 
projects addressing both fundamental and applied aspects of 
next-generation expert systems and machine learning. We 
believe that these next-generation expert systems will have 
to be based on cognitive models of expert human reasoning 
and learning in order to perform with the ability of a human 
expert. Consequently, we term such next-generation expert 
systems cognitive expert systems. 
Cognitive expert systems should display three charac- 
teristics. First, because expert human reasoning and learning 
rely in part on qualitative causal models and large-scale 
event-based memory structures, cognitive expert systems 
should rely on similar knowledge. Second, because human 
experts are skilled at acquiring knowledge, often through 
natural language interaction, cognitive expert systems 
should learn through real-world natural language interac- 
tion. Third, cognitive expert systems should not merely 
learn from the input provided but should be aware of the 
information that has not been provided and ask the user for it. 
(In the extreme case, interacting with such a system consists 
entirely of answering its questions.) Thus, we seek to build 
cognitive expert systems that model expert human reason- 
ing, learn from real-world natural language interaction, and 
ask questions about what is not understood. 
To achieve these goals, our research falls into three ma- 
jor areas: (1) diagnostic expert systems that learn causal 
models for physical mechanisms by understanding real- 
world natural language explanations, (2) expert systems that 
Mallory Selflidge is an assistant professor in the Department of Computer 
Science and Engineering, Donald .I Dickerson is a professor in the 
Depal tment of Psychology, and Stanley F. Biggs is an associate PI ofessor in 
the Department of Accounting at the University of Connecticut, Storrs, 
Connecticut 06268 
judge performance of corporations and learn about them by 
reading real-world sources, and (3) fundamental research in 
computer models of cognitive development. 
CMACS: Learning Causal Models of Physical 
Mechanisms by Understanding Real-World Natural 
Language Explanations 
The causal model acquisition system (CMACS) (Daniel1 
1985; Klimczak 1986; Selfridge, Daniell, and Simmons 
1985) addresses how an expert system can learn causal 
models of physical mechanisms by understanding real-world 
natural language explanations of these mechanisms. Follow- 
ing research conducted by deKleer and Brown (1983; 1984)) 
CMACS represents physical mechanisms as combinations of 
Abstract In order for next-generation expert systems to 
demonstrate the performance, robustness, flexibility, and learning 
ability of human experts, they will have to be based on cognitive 
models of expert human reasoning and learning We call such next- 
generation systems cognitive expert systems. Research at the 
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory at the University of Connecticut 
is directed toward understanding the principles underlying 
cognitive expert systems and developing computer programs 
embodying those principles The Causal Model Acquisition 
System (CMACS) learns causal models of physical mechanisms by 
understanding real-world natural language explanations of those 
mechanisms. The Going Concern Expert (GCX) uses business and 
environmental knowledge to assess whether a company will remain 
in business for at least the following year The Business 
Information System (BIS) acquires business and environmental 
knowledge from in-depth reading of real-world news stories. These 
systems are based on theories of expert human reasoning and 
learning, and thus represent steps toward next-generation cognitive 
expert systems. 
SPRING 1987 75 

--- PDF PAGE 2 ---
components whose behavior it already knows about. This 
component knowledge consists of semantic component 
frames and associated knowledge of component behavior, 
which are similar to deKleer and Brown’s confluences. 
In order to learn a causal model of a new physical mech- 
anism from an explanation, CMACS translates each explan- 
atory statement into a representation of its meaning. If the 
meaning expresses a direct causal connection, CMACS 
builds the appropriate piece of causal model. If the statement 
expresses causality between two components that cannot di- 
rectly be connected to each other, CMACS infers the inter- 
mediate components. If the causality expressed by the state- 
ment is ambiguous, CMACS uses its knowledge of plausible 
component interconnections to infer the correct causality 
and build the correct piece of causal model. If the statement 
refers to a subcomponent of another component, CMACS 
merges the subcomponent information with the other com- 
ponent in the model. After processing the entire explanation, 
CMACS examines the causal model it has built and searches 
for components that have inputs or outputs which are not 
connected to other components. Such incompletely con- 
nected components represent areas of ignorance for 
CMACS; it generates natural language questions about these 
areas and builds additional pieces of the causal model from 
the user’s answers. 
After acquiring a causal model for a mechanism, 
CMACS can use the model to answer questions and generate 
explanations about the mechanism and to understand mecha- 
nism behavior and diagnose mechanism failures. CMACS 
answers questions and gives explanations by expressing ele- 
ments of the model through a natural language generator 
(Cullingford et al. 1982). It understands mechanism behav- 
ior and diagnoses failures by (1) reasoning backward 
through the model from external behavior (for example, 
gauge behavior) to hypothesize possible control changes or 
component failures that might cause the behavior, (2) per- 
forming qualitative simulation of each hypothesized control 
change or mechanism failure to generate predictions about 
subsequent gauge behavior, and (3) comparing predicted 
gauge behavior with actual behavior to diagnose the control 
change or component failure. 
CMACS currently knows 45 different components and 
has a vocabulary of 175 words. It successfully learns causal 
models of an air conditioner and a gas turbine by reading 
explanations taken from repair and maintenance manuals. 
After learning, CMACS can answer questions and generate 
explanations about each mechanism and can understand 
mechanism behavior and diagnose mechanism failures 
within the limits of its qualitative reasoning abilities. Our 
current research with CMACS involves improving these 
abilities by (1) developing techniques for qualitative reason- 
ing about the behavior of compressible fluids, the relation- 
ship between passive components and active components in a 
mechanism, and various types of mechanical motion; (2) ex- 
panding the vocabulary, component knowledge, and learn- 
ing abilities to include a much wider variety of explanations; 
and (3) exploring CMACS’s possible role in an intelligent 
tutoring system. 
GCX: Using Event-Based Memory Structures in an 
Expert System to Make Going-Concern Judgments 
The going-concern expert (GCX) (Biggs and Selfridge 1985, 
1986a, 1986b; Selfridge, Biggs, and Krupka 1986) is being 
developed to address whether a company is a going concern, 
that is, whether it will remain in business for at least the 
following year. The question is important because it is a fun- 
damental part of an auditor’s certification of a company’s 
financial statements. If, for example, auditors determine that 
a company is not a going concern, then generally accepted 
accounting principles are not strictly applicable. Interviews 
with auditors have revealed that not only do they use knowl- 
edge of financial performance in making going-concern 
judgments, but they also have extensive knowledge of busi- 
ness and environmental factors which represent the underly- 
ing causes of financial performance. Thus, building GCX 
has involved developing both a financial-reasoning capabil- 
ity and a capability to reason causally from business and en- 
vironmental factors. The going-concern judgment is an ap- 
propriate research topic not only because it is an important 
part of auditing but also because it is representative of a large 
set of similar problems, both within auditing and within the 
larger context of understanding organizational behavior. 
GCX begins with financial data from a company’s an- 
nual reports for a period of time and with business and envi- 
ronmental knowledge covering this same period. The busi- 
ness and environmental knowledge consists of a network of 
business and environmental events linked by temporal and 
causal relationships. In addition, this knowledge is orga- 
nized and indexed through a set of higher-level knowledge 
structures, similar to Schank’s memory organization packets 
(MOPS) (Schank 1982), that capture business and environ- 
mental goal structures and generalizations. Finally, causal 
links from business and environmental knowledge to a finan- 
cial model of the company are maintained to enable GCX to 
understand the financial effects of business and environmen- 
tal events. 
GCX uses a set of financial reasoning rules to calculate a 
number of financial measures and evaluate these measures to 
make judgments about the company’s financial perfor- 
mance. It then accesses its knowledge of the company’s busi- 
ness and environment and uses it in a series of processing 
steps to refine its judgments. First, it understands the under- 
lying reasons for the company’s financial performance. It 
might understand, for example, that a company’s recent op- 
erating loss was caused by an increase in fuel costs. Second, 
it uses this knowledge to judge whether the company’s plans 
to overcome unfavorable conditions will succeed. For exam- 
ple, if told that the company plans a certain action, GCX 
examines its knowledge of the company to see if a similar 
76 THE AI MAGAZINE 

--- PDF PAGE 3 ---
action has ever been taken before and, if it has been, to assess 
whether it was successful. Finally, based on its evaluation of 
the company’s financial state and its judgments of the com- 
pany’s plans to solve its underlying problems, GCX judges 
whether the company is a going concern. It can then answer 
questions about its judgment and the underlying problems 
faced by the company. 
To date, GCX has been tested on data from five different 
companies and has extensive business and environmental 
knowledge about three. It has approximately 100 financial- 
reasoning rules, and its largest knowledge base consists of 
about 100 business and environmental events causally and 
temporally linked. GCX makes going-concern judgments 
about all five companies that are qualitatively similar to 
those of expert auditors. It uses business and environmental 
knowledge to reason about the possible success of the com- 
pany’s plans in a manner similar to expert auditors, and it 
generates explanations for company performance that are 
similar to the explanations of expert auditors. 
BIS: Acquiring Event-Based Memory Structures 
Because systems such as GCX require vast amounts of busi- 
ness and environmental knowledge, the business informa- 
tion system (BIS) (Moreland 1985; Moreland and Selfridge 
1986), was developed to address acquiring such knowledge 
from in-depth reading of real-world news stories. It deals 
with a number of research issues, including the integration of 
natural language and memory structures to understand large 
and complex stories in detail and to make cross-story infer- 
ences, the “putting two and two together” types of infer- 
ences that cannot be made from information in a single story 
but rather must be made on the basis of information in two or 
more stories. 
In order to acquire business and environmental knowl- 
edge through an in-depth reading of news stories, BIS reads 
each story one sentence at a time. It constructs a meaning 
representation for each sentence, unifying concepts occur- 
ring in the sentence with concepts already in the knowledge 
base if they are the same. BIS then examines a number of 
inference rules that embody knowledge of how to build the 
memory structure from the meanings of input sentences. 
These rules are used to create the appropriate links between 
the input meaning and existing concepts in the memory 
structure, to infer the existence of missing concepts, and to 
modify concepts on the basis of new information. Once the 
meaning of the input has been added to the knowledge base, 
other inference rules are examined. These rules are tested 
against the knowledge base, and conclusions are drawn on 
the basis of learned information. If the information trigger- 
ing such inferences was originally derived from different 
stories, then the inference made is a cross-story inference. 
After a set of news stories has been processed, BIS is able to 
answer questions and generate summaries and paraphrases 
about story content and its inferences and conclusions. 
. . . research on the modeling of 
children’s cognition and learning 
. . . will lead to fundamental 
insights into the nature of expertise 
and learning . . . 
BIS currently has a vocabulary of 300 words and has 
been tested on two sets of three stories about the telecommu- 
nications industry, with each set consisting of about 35 
fifteen-word sentences. It successfully understands both sets 
of stories, performing all the required memory accesses and 
entity merging, and builds the appropriate memory struc- 
tures, including the results of cross-story inferences. The 
primary results of our research are (1) the development of an 
architecture and a set of inference rules with which BIS 
learns a memory structure by reading real-world news sto- 
ries in depth and (2) the development of a number of repre- 
sentational structures and techniques that together with those 
of the GCX system represent a promising approach to the 
representation of business and environmental knowledge. 
Thus, BIS represents a powerful approach to the problem of 
knowledge acquisition by cognitive expert systems. 
Our current research with GCX and BIS involves (1) 
exploring the feasibility of unifying GCX and BIS into a sys- 
tem that acquires business and environmental knowledge, 
(2) expanding the business and environmental knowledge of 
both systems and refining it to closely match the cognitive 
characteristics of human experts, (3) adding the ability to 
generate queries about unexplained business and environ- 
mental events, and (4) extending the systems’ knowledge to 
encompass a variety of other domains requiring cognitive 
expertise. 
Cognitive Development 
In addition to research previously described that is intended 
to address issues of direct and long-term relevance to various 
application areas, we are also pursuing research on the mod- 
eling of children’s cognition and learning. We believe that 
such work will lead to fundamental insights into the nature of 
expertise and learning. Our efforts in this regard are concen- 
trated in the area of child language learning, with secondary 
projects in several other areas. 
Because an understanding of how children acquire lan- 
guage is important for theories of learning, we are carrying 
out long-term research on child language acquisition with the 
CHILD program (Selfridge 1980, 1986a, 1986b). We ex- 
pect that this research will not only add to knowledge about 
child language acquisition per se but will also have direct 
implications for adult-level natural language processing by 
next-generation expert systems, particularly in the areas of 
SPRING 1987 77 

--- PDF PAGE 4 ---
vocabulary acquisition and overall robustness. CHILD is 
equipped with a natural language analyzer and generator, 
language learning algorithms, and an inference mechanism 
for using context to infer the meanings of incompletely un- 
derstood utterances. 
Currently, CHILD begins with the type of world knowl- 
edge possessed by a typical one-year-old and, upon receiv- 
ing language input which is similar to that received by chil- 
dren, learns to understand and generate active and passive 
declarative and imperative statements in a developmental 
progression which is similar to that followed by children be- 
tween the ages of one and five years. Specifically, it mani- 
fests language behavior consistent with six facts of language 
development, including the making of certain types of lan- 
guage errors and the subsequent recovery from the making 
of these errors. In addition, CHILD learns to recognize ut- 
terances as grammatically well formed. This recognition oc- 
curs not as a specific task but as a side effect of the learning 
that produces the developmental progression. CHILD is rel- 
evant to theoretical issues in language acquisition because it 
makes a number of new predictions about child language 
acquisition and because the underlying theory provides an- 
swers to a number of classic questions about child language 
acquisition. Thus, we believe CHILD represents a powerful 
approach to modeling child language acquisition. 
In addition to the CHILD program, we are carrying out 
several other secondary research projects on building com- 
puter models of various aspects of child learning. The 
COUNT program (Selfridge and Selfridge 1986) models 
how children learn to count. COUNT learns to count from 
psychologically plausible input and makes counting errors 
typical of children. The IMP program (Dickerson 1986) 
models sensorimotor learning typical of infants and incorpo- 
rates a model of the motivation behind such learning. The 
BALANCE project, just under way, is a computer program 
which learns to make judgments about the Piagetian “bal- 
ance scale” and which manifests a developmental progres- 
sion similar to that of children. Finally, we are using con- 
cepts developed in the domain of robot plan learning and 
plan recognition to model observational learning by children 
(Selfridge and Dickerson 1985). 
Other Research 
In addition to our primary research efforts, we are also car- 
rying out or have carried out smaller-scale research projects 
in a number of other areas. The TARGET system (Guzzi 
1985; Selfridge and Guzzi 1986) operates with a real-world 
dual-manipulator robot workstation and learns robot assem- 
bly plans by performing plan recognition on the demonstra- 
tion of an assembly task. The NLR system (Selfridge and 
Vannoy 1986) operates with the same real-world dual- 
manipulator robot workstation and learns robot assembly 
plans on the basis of natural language interaction with a user. 
The MEMEX system is a rule-based expert system for diag- 
nosing marine diesel engine faults that incorporates a natural 
language interface for communication with the user (Mac- 
Donald, Dickerson, and Selfridge 1986). The INVENTOR 
system (Selfridge and Cuthill 1986) addresses questions of 
creative invention and computer-assisted engineering. IN- 
VENTOR accepts a set of I-O specifications and then infers 
the causal model for a mechanism that fulfills the specifica- 
tions . 
Future Directions 
The Artificial Intelligence Laboratory of the University of 
Connecticut is engaged in a program of research in cognitive 
expert systems and machine learning. We intend to continue 
this research and will concentrate on applications of cogni- 
tive expert systems and knowledge acquisition to real-world 
contexts as well as further our fundamental research and the 
transfer of its results to real-world applications. 
The Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 
The Artificial Intelligence Laboratory at the University of 
Connecticut is part of the Computer Applications Research 
Center, which is part of the University of Connecticut 
School of Engineering. It currently includes Mallory 
Selfridge, Donald J. Dickerson, Stanley F. Biggs, Benjamin 
Moreland, Anthony Guzzi, George Krupka, Barbara 
Cuthill, Saundra Wallfesh, and Peter Gattinella and has been 
in existence since 1984. The University of Connecticut arti- 
ficial intelligence (AI) curriculum includes both undergradu- 
ate and graduate courses in AI programming, AI, natural 
language, expert systems, robotics, and machine learning. 
Acknowledgments 
Partial research funding has been provided by the state of 
Connecticut; United Technologies Research Center; the 
Peat Marwick Mitchell Foundation; and Ship Analytics, Inc. 
References 
Biggs, S F , and Selfridge, M. 1986a Developing an Expert System for the 
Auditor’s Going-Concern Judgment Papet presented at the Fourth 
Annual Audit Symposium at the University of Southern California 
Biggs, S. F , and Selftidge, M. 1986b Combining Rule-Based and 
Network-Based Logic in Expert Systems for Accounting Paper 
presented at the American Accounting Association Annual Meeting 
Biggs, S F., and Selfridge, M 1985 Developing an Expert System for the 
Auditor’s Going-Concern Judgment Paper presented at the Joint 
National Meeting of The Institute for Management Science and the 
Operations Research Society of America. 
Cullingford, R E ; Krueger, M W ; Selfridge, M.; and Bienkowski, M 
1982 Automated Explanations as a Component of a Computer-Aided 
Design System. In IEEE Transactions oj Systems, Man, and 
Cybernetics 12(2): 168-181 
Daniell, 3. D 1985 Learning Causal Models by Understanding Real- 
World Natmal Language Explanations M S thesis, Technical Report, 
#TR86-21, Dept of Computer Science and Engineering, Univ of 
Connecticut 
dcKleer, J , and Brown, J S , 1984 A Qualitative Physics Based on 
Confluences ArtiJkinl Intelligence 24: 7-84 
78 THE AI MAGAZINE 

--- PDF PAGE 5 ---
deKleer, J , and Brown, J S , 1983 The Origin, Form, and Logic of 
Qualitative Physical Laws In Proceedings of the Eighth International 
Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 1158-I 169. Menlo Park, 
Calif : American Association of Artificial Intelligence 
Dickerson, D. J 1986 IMP: A Computer Model of Sensotimotor 
Motivation and Learning, Technical Report, #TR86-20, Dept of 
Computer Science and Engineering, Univ of Connecticut 
Guzzi, A 1985 Leatning Robot Assembly Plans by Observation M S 
thesis, Technical Report, #TR86-22, Dept. of Computer Science and 
Engineering, Univ of Connecticut. 
Klimczak, B 1986. Learning Causal Models of Physical Mechanisms from 
Real-World Explanations Using a Global Dictionary. M S thesis, 
Technical Report, #TR86-23, Dept of Computer Science and 
Engineet ing, Univ of Connecticut 
MacDonald, C.; Dickerson, D J ; and Selfridge, M. 1986 Natural 
Language Processing within a Rule-Based Expert System fol 
Diagnosing Marine Diesel Engine Faults, Technical Rep01 t, #TR86-24, 
Dept. of Compute1 Science and Engineering, Univ of Connecticut 
Moreland, B , and Selftidge, M 1986 Acquiring Business and 
Envitonmental Knowledge from Real-World Natural Language Text, 
Technical Report, #TR86-15, Dept of Computer Science and 
Engineering, Univ of Connecticut 
Moreland, B 1985. Cross-Story Inferences Made during Competitive 
Analysis: A Computer Model M S thesis, Technical Repott, #TR86- 
25, Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering, Univ of Connecticut 
Schank, R C. 1982 Dynamic Memory: A Theory oflearning in Computers 
and People. Cambridge, Mass.: Cambridge University Press. 
Selfridge, M 1986a A Computer Model of Child Language Acquisition 
AI tijkial Intelligence 29: 171-216 
Selfridge, M. 1986b How Children Learn to Recognize Grammaticality: A 
Computer Model, Technical Report, #TR86-16, Dept of Computer 
Science and Engineering, Univ. of Connecticut. 
Selfridge, M ; Biggs, S F ; and Klupka, G 1986 GCX: A Cognitive 
Expert System for Making Going-Concern Judgments, Technical 
Report, #TR86-20, Dept of Computet Science and Engineering, Univ. 
of Connecticut 
Selftidge, M., and Cuthill, B. 1986 Automatic Invention: Inferring the 
Causal Model of a Physical Mechanism from a Description of Desired 
Behavior, Technical Report, #TR86-17, Dept. of Computer Science 
and Engineeting, Univ of Connecticut. 
Selfridge, M , and Guzzi, A. 1986. Learning Robot Assembly Plans by 
Observation, Technical Report, #TR86-18, Dept of Computer Science 
and Engineering, Univ of Connecticut 
Self1 idge, M , and Selfridge, 0 G. 1986 How Children Learn to Count: A 
Computer Model, Technical Report, #TR86-19, Dept of Computer 
Science and Engineering, Univ of Connecticut 
Selftidge, M., and Vannoy, W 1986 A Natutal Language Interface to a 
Robot Assembly System ZEEEJownal ofRobotics RA-2(3). 
Selfiidge, M ; Daniell, J. D ; and Simmons, D. 1985 Learning Causal 
Models by Understanding Real-World Natural Language Explanations 
In Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence Applications, 378-383. Washington D C : IEEE 
Computer Society 
Selfridge, M , and Dicketson, D 1985. Observational Learning by 
Computer In Proceedings of the Second International Conference on 
AI tificial Intelligence and Education, 95-97 
Selfridge, M 1980 A Process Model of Language Acquisition Ph D 
diss , Research Report, #172, Dept of Computer Science,Yale Univ 
KNOWLEDGE ENGINEERING: 
Artificial Intelligence Research at the Stanford Heuristic Programming Project 
“The film, KNOWLEDGE ENGINEERING, was produced by Stanford University’s Knowledge Systems Labora- 
tory, and shown at the Tskuba World Technology Fair. We have decided to make it available to technical libraries 
and individuals for their collections.” Edward Feigenbaum 
This CINE award winning film begins with an in- 
troduction to the methodology developed at Stanford 
for discovering and working on basic problems in ar- 
tificial intelligence. It illustrates the current state of 
knowledge-based system research in the laboratory, 
the transfer of this technology into diverse appiica- 
tions in society, and the significant research issues 
that have to be addressed for the 1980’s and 1990’s. 
“The film provides an interesting and informative 
look at knowledge engineering . . . Its ideal use is as 
an introduction to a lecture on artificial intelligence 
or expert systems.” 
American Association for the Advance- 
ment of Science Review. Science Books I 
and Films 
Mail order form to: 
HPPlFilm 
Building C 
701 Welch Road 
Palo Alto, CA 94304 
Please type or print clearly 
NAME 
ADDRESS 
CITY/STATE/ZIP CODE 
Your phone no. ( ) - 
PRE-PAYMENT IS NECESSARY-Enclose check to 
the order of STANFORD UNIVERSITY* 
0 16 mm film. 
0 Beta Videocassette : 
.$450.00 
0 VHS Videocassette . 
350.00 
350.00 
0 U-Matic Videocassette 
*California only, add 7% sales tax 